
# Conservation of Expected Evidence

Friedrich Spee von Langenfeld, a priest who heard the confessions
of condemned witches, wrote in 1631 the *Cautio Criminalis*
('prudence in criminal cases') in which he bitingly described the
decision tree for condemning accused witches:  If the witch had led
an evil and improper life, she was guilty; if she had led a good
and proper life, this too was a proof, for witches dissemble and
try to appear especially virtuous. After the woman was put in
prison: if she was afraid, this proved her guilt; if she was not
afraid, this proved her guilt, for witches characteristically
pretend innocence and wear a bold front. Or on hearing of a
denunciation of witchcraft against her, she might seek flight or
remain; if she ran, that proved her guilt; if she remained, the
devil had detained her so she could not get away.

Spee acted as confessor to many witches; he was thus in a position
to observe *every* branch of the accusation tree, that no matter
*what* the accused witch said or did, it was held a proof against
her.  In any individual case, you would only hear one branch of the
dilemma.  It is for this reason that scientists write down their
experimental predictions in advance.

But *you can't have it both ways* - as a matter of probability
theory, not mere fairness.  The rule that
"[absence of evidence *is* evidence of absence](/lw/ih/absence_of_evidence_is_evidence_of_absence/)"
is a special case of a more general law, which I would name
Conservation of Expected Evidence:  The *expectation* of the
posterior probability, after viewing the evidence, must equal the
prior probability.

> **P(H) = P(H)****  
> P(H) = P(H,E) + P(H,\~E)****  
> P(H) = P(H|E)\*P(E) + P(H|\~E)\*P(\~E)**

*Therefore,* for every expectation of evidence, there is an equal
and opposite expectation of counterevidence.

If you expect a strong probability of seeing weak evidence in one
direction, it must be balanced by a weak expectation of seeing
strong evidence in the other direction.  If you're very confident
in your theory, and therefore anticipate seeing an outcome that
matches your hypothesis, this can only provide a very small
increment to your belief (it is already close to 1); but the
unexpected failure of your prediction would (and must) deal your
confidence a huge blow.  On *average,* you must expect to be
*exactly* as confident as when you started out.  Equivalently, the
mere *expectation* of encountering evidence - before you've
actually seen it - should not shift your prior beliefs.  (Again, if
this is not intuitively obvious, see
[An Intuitive Explanation of Bayesian Reasoning](http://yudkowsky.net/bayes/bayes.html).)

So if you
[claim](/lw/ih/absence_of_evidence_is_evidence_of_absence/) that
"no sabotage" is evidence *for*the existence of a Japanese-American
Fifth Column, you must conversely hold that seeing sabotage would
argue *against* a Fifth Column.  If you claim that "a good and
proper life" is evidence that a woman is a witch, then an evil and
improper life must be evidence that she is not a witch.  If you
[argue](/lw/i8/religions_claim_to_be_nondisprovable/) that God, to
test humanity's faith, refuses to reveal His existence, then the
miracles described in the Bible must argue against the existence of
God.

Doesn't quite sound right, does it?  Pay attention to that feeling
of *this seems a little forced,* that
[quiet strain in the back of your mind](/lw/if/your_strength_as_a_rationalist/). 
It's important.

For a true Bayesian, it is impossible to seek evidence that
*confirms* a theory.  There is no possible plan you can devise, no
clever strategy, no cunning device, by which you can legitimately
expect your confidence in a fixed proposition to be higher (on
*average*) than before.  You can only ever seek evidence to *test*
a theory, not to confirm it.

This realization can take quite a load off your mind.  You need not
worry about how to interpret every possible experimental result to
confirm your theory.  You needn't bother planning how to make *any*
given iota of evidence confirm your theory, because you know that
for every expectation of evidence, there is an equal and oppositive
expectation of counterevidence.  If you try to weaken the
counterevidence of a possible "abnormal" observation, you can only
do it by weakening the support of a "normal" observation, to a
precisely equal and opposite degree.  It is a zero-sum game.  No
matter how you connive, no matter how you argue, no matter how you
strategize, you can't possibly expect the resulting game plan to
shift your beliefs (on average) in a particular direction.

You might as well sit back and relax while you wait for the
evidence to come in.

...human psychology is *so* screwed up.
