
# Fake Explanations

Once upon a time, there was an instructor who taught physics
students.  One day she called them into her class, and showed them
a wide, square plate of metal, next to a hot radiator.  The
students each put their hand on the plate, and found the side next
to the radiator cool, and the distant side warm.  And the
instructor said, *Why do you think this happens?*  Some students
guessed convection of air currents, and others guessed strange
metals in the plate.  They devised many creative explanations, none
stooping so low as to say "I don't know" or
"[This seems impossible.](/lw/if/your_strength_as_a_rationalist/)"

And the answer was that before the students entered the room, the
instructor turned the plate around.

Consider the student who frantically stammers, "Eh, maybe because
of the heat conduction and so?"  I ask: is this answer a
[proper belief](/lw/i7/belief_as_attire/)?  The words are easily
enough [professed](/lw/i6/professing_and_cheering/) - said in a
loud, emphatic voice.  But do the words actually
[control anticipation](/lw/i4/belief_in_belief/)?

Ponder that innocent little phrase, "because of", which comes
before "heat conduction".  Ponder some of the *other* things we
could put after it.  We could say, for example, "Because of
phlogiston", or "Because of magic."

"Magic!" you cry.  "That's not a *scientific* explanation!" 
Indeed, the phrases "because of heat conduction" and "because of
magic" are readily recognized as belonging to different
*literary genres.*  "Heat conduction" is something that Spock might
say on *Star Trek*, whereas "magic" would be said by Giles in
*Buffy the Vampire Slayer*.

However, as Bayesians, we take no notice of literary genres.  For
us, the substance of a model is the control it exerts on
anticipation.  If you say "heat conduction", what experience does
that lead you to *anticipate?*  Under normal circumstances, it
leads you to anticipate that, if you put your hand on the side of
the plate near the radiator, that side will feel warmer than the
opposite side.  If "because of heat conduction" can also explain
the radiator-adjacent side feeling *cooler,* then it can explain
pretty much *anything.*

[And](/lw/i3/making_beliefs_pay_rent_in_anticipated_experiences/)
[as](/lw/i4/belief_in_belief/) [we](/lw/i5/bayesian_judo/)
[all](/lw/i6/professing_and_cheering/)
[know](/lw/i7/belief_as_attire/)
[by](/lw/i8/religions_claim_to_be_nondisprovable/)
[this](/lw/ia/focus_your_uncertainty/)
[point](/lw/if/your_strength_as_a_rationalist/)
([I](/lw/ih/absence_of_evidence_is_evidence_of_absence/)
[do](/lw/im/hindsight_devalues_science/)
[hope](/lw/ii/conservation_of_expected_evidence/)), if you are
equally good at explaining any outcome, you have zero knowledge. 
"Because of heat conduction", used in such fashion, is a disguised
hypothesis of maximum entropy.  It is anticipation-isomorphic to
saying "magic".  It feels like an explanation, but it's not.

Supposed that instead of guessing, we measured the heat of the
metal plate at various points and various times.  Seeing a metal
plate next to the radiator, we would ordinarily expect the point
temperatures to satisfy an equilibrium of the diffusion equation
with respect to the boundary conditions imposed by the
environment.  You might not know the exact temperature of the first
point measured, but after measuring the first points - I'm not
physicist enough to know how many would be required - you could
take an excellent guess at the rest.

A true master of the art of using numbers to constrain the
anticipation of material phenomena - a "physicist" - would take
some measurements and say, "This plate was in equilibrium with the
environment two and a half minutes ago, turned around, and is now
approaching equilibrium again."

The deeper error of the students is not simply that they failed to
constrain anticipation.  Their deeper error is that they thought
they were doing physics.  They said the phrase "because of",
followed by the sort of words Spock might say on *Star Trek,* and
thought they thereby entered the magisterium of science.

Not so.  They simply moved their magic from one literary genre to
another.
