
# Making Beliefs Pay Rent (in Anticipated Experiences)

Thus begins the ancient parable:

*If a tree falls in a forest and no one hears it, does it make a sound? One says, "Yes it does, for it makes vibrations in the air." Another says, "No it does not, for there is no auditory processing in any brain."*

Suppose that, after the tree falls, the two walk into the forest
together. Will one expect to see the tree fallen to the right, and
the other expect to see the tree fallen to the left? Suppose that
before the tree falls, the two leave a sound recorder next to the
tree. Would one, playing back the recorder, expect to hear
something different from the other? Suppose they attach an
electroencephalograph to any brain in the world; would one expect
to see a different trace than the other? Though the two argue, one
saying "No," and the other saying "Yes," they do not anticipate any
different experiences.  The two think they have different models of
the world, but they have no difference with respect to what they
expect will *happen to* them.



It's tempting to try to eliminate this mistake class by insisting
that the only legitimate kind of belief is an anticipation of
sensory experience. But the world does, in fact, contain much that
is not sensed directly. We don't see the atoms underlying the
brick, but the atoms are in fact there. There is a floor beneath
your feet, but you don't *experience* the floor directly; you see
the light *reflected* from the floor, or rather, you see what your
retina and visual cortex have processed of that light. To infer the
floor from seeing the floor is to step back into the unseen causes
of experience. It may seem like a very short and direct step, but
it is still a step.

You stand on top of a tall building, next to a grandfather clock
with an hour, minute, and ticking second hand. In your hand is a
bowling ball, and you drop it off the roof. On which tick of the
clock will you hear the crash of the bowling ball hitting the
ground?

To answer precisely, you must use beliefs like
*Earth's gravity is 9.8 meters per second per second,* and
*This building is around 120 meters tall.* These beliefs are not
wordless anticipations of a sensory experience; they are
verbal-ish, propositional. It probably does not exaggerate much to
describe these two beliefs as sentences made out of words. But
these two beliefs have an inferential *consequence* that is a
direct sensory anticipation - if the clock's second hand is on the
12 numeral when you drop the ball, you anticipate seeing it on the
1 numeral when you hear the crash five seconds later. To anticipate
sensory experiences as precisely as possible, we must process
beliefs that are not anticipations of sensory experience.

It is a great strength of *Homo sapiens* that we can, better than
any other species in the world, learn to model the unseen. It is
also one of our great weak points. Humans often believe in things
that are not only unseen but unreal.

The same brain that builds a network of inferred causes behind
sensory experience, can also build a network of causes that is not
connected to sensory experience, or poorly connected. Alchemists
believed that phlogiston caused fire - we could oversimply their
minds by drawing a little node labeled "Phlogiston", and an arrow
from this node to their sensory experience of a crackling campfire
- but this belief yielded no advance predictions; the link from
phlogiston to experience was always configured after the
experience, rather than constraining the experience in advance. Or
suppose your postmodern English professor teaches you that the
famous writer Wulky Wilkinsen is actually a "post-utopian". What
does this mean you should expect from his books? Nothing. The
belief, if you can call it that, doesn't connect to sensory
experience at all. But you had better remember the propositional
assertion that "Wulky Wilkinsen" has the "post-utopian" attribute,
so you can regurgitate it on the upcoming quiz. Likewise if
"post-utopians" show "colonial alienation"; if the quiz asks
whether Wulky Wilkinsen shows colonial alienation, you'd better
answer yes. The beliefs are connected to each other, though still
not connected to any anticipated experience.

We can build up whole networks of beliefs that are connected only
to each other - call these "floating" beliefs. It is a uniquely
human flaw among animal species, a perversion of *Homo sapiens's*
ability to build more general and flexible belief networks.

The rationalist virtue of *empiricism* consists of constantly
asking which experiences our beliefs predict - or better yet,
prohibit.  Do you believe that phlogiston is the cause of fire? 
Then what do you expect to see happen, because of that? Do you
believe that Wulky Wilkinsen is a post-utopian? Then what do you
expect to see because of that? No, not "colonial alienation";
*what experience will happen to you?* Do you believe that if a tree
falls in the forest, and no one hears it, it still makes a sound?
Then what experience must therefore befall you?

It is even better to ask: what experience *must not* happen to
you?  Do you believe that *elan vital* explains the mysterious
aliveness of living beings?  Then what does this belief *not* allow
to happen - what would definitely falsify this belief? A null
answer means that your belief does not *constrain* experience; it
permits *anything* to happen to you.  It floats.

When you argue a seemingly factual question, always keep in mind
which difference of anticipation you are arguing about. If you
can't find the difference of anticipation, you're probably arguing
about labels in your belief network - or even worse, floating
beliefs, barnacles on your network. If you don't know what
experiences are implied by Wulky Wilkinsen being a post-utopian,
you can go on arguing forever. (You can also publish papers
forever.)

Above all, don't ask what to believe - ask what to anticipate.
Every question of belief should flow from a question of
anticipation, and that question of anticipation should be the
center of the inquiry. Every guess of belief should begin by
flowing to a specific guess of anticipation, and should continue to
pay rent in future anticipations. If a belief turns deadbeat, evict
it.

# Belief in Belief

Carl Sagan once told a
[parable](http://www.godlessgeeks.com/LINKS/Dragon.htm) of a man
who comes to us and claims: "There is a dragon in my garage."
Fascinating! We reply that we wish to see this dragon - let us set
out at once for the garage! "But wait," the claimant says to us,
"it is an *invisible* dragon."

Now as Sagan points out, this doesn't make the hypothesis
unfalsifiable. Perhaps we go to the claimant's garage, and although
we see no dragon, we hear heavy breathing from no visible source;
footprints mysteriously appear on the ground; and instruments show
that something in the garage is consuming oxygen and breathing out
carbon dioxide.

But now suppose that we say to the claimant, "Okay, we'll visit the
garage and see if we can hear heavy breathing," and the claimant
quickly says no, it's an *inaudible* dragon. We propose to measure
carbon dioxide in the air, and the claimant says the dragon does
not breathe. We propose to toss a bag of flour into the air to see
if it outlines an invisible dragon, and the claimant immediately
says, "The dragon is permeable to flour."

Carl Sagan used this parable to illustrate the classic moral that
poor hypotheses need to do fast footwork to avoid falsification.
But I tell this parable to make a different point: The claimant
must have an accurate model of the situation *somewhere* in his
mind, because he can anticipate, in advance,
*exactly which experimental results he'll need to excuse.*



Some philosophers have been much confused by such scenarios,
asking, "Does the claimant *really* believe there's a dragon
present, or not?" As if the human brain only had enough disk space
to represent one belief at a time! Real minds are more tangled than
that. As discussed in yesterday's post, there are different types
of belief;
[not all beliefs are direct anticipations](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i3/making_beliefs_pay_rent_in_anticipated_experiences/).
The claimant clearly does not *anticipate* seeing anything unusual
upon opening the garage door; otherwise he wouldn't make advance
excuses. It may also be that the claimant's pool of propositional
beliefs contains *There is a dragon in my garage.* It may seem, to
a rationalist, that these two beliefs should collide and conflict
even though they are of different types. Yet it is a physical fact
that you can write "The sky is green!" next to a picture of a blue
sky without the paper bursting into flames.

The rationalist virtue of empiricism is supposed to prevent us from
this class of mistake. We're supposed to constantly ask our beliefs
which experiences they predict, make them pay rent in anticipation.
But the dragon-claimant's problem runs deeper, and cannot be cured
with such simple advice. It's not exactly *difficult* to connect
belief in a dragon to anticipated experience of the garage. If you
believe there's a dragon in your garage, then you can expect to
open up the door and see a dragon. If you don't see a dragon, then
that means there's no dragon in your garage. This is pretty
straightforward. You can even try it with your own garage.

No, this invisibility business is a symptom of something much
worse.

Depending on how your childhood went, you may remember a time
period when you first began to doubt Santa Claus's existence, but
you still believed that you were *supposed* to believe in Santa
Claus, so you tried to deny the doubts. As Daniel Dennett observes,
where it is difficult to believe a thing, it is often much easier
to believe that you *ought* to believe it. What does it mean to
believe that the
[Ultimate Cosmic Sky](http://lesswrong.com/lw/gt/a_fable_of_science_and_politics/) is
both perfectly blue and perfectly green? The statement is
confusing; it's not even clear what it would *mean* to believe it -
what exactly would *be* believed, if you believed. You can much
more easily believe that it is *proper,* that it is *good* and
*virtuous* and *beneficial,* to believe that the Ultimate Cosmic
Sky is both perfectly blue and perfectly green.  Dennett calls this
"belief in belief".

And here things become complicated, as human minds are wont to do -
I think even Dennett oversimplifies how this psychology works in
practice. For one thing, if you believe in belief, you cannot admit
to yourself that you only believe in belief, because it is virtuous
to *believe,* not to believe in belief, and so if you only believe
in belief, instead of believing, you are not virtuous. Nobody will
*admit* to themselves, "I don't believe the Ultimate Cosmic Sky is
blue and green, but I believe I ought to believe it" - not unless
they are unusually capable of acknowledging their own lack of
virtue. People don't believe in belief in belief, they just believe
in belief.

(Those who find this confusing may find it helpful to study
mathematical logic, which trains one to make very sharp
distinctions between the proposition P, a proof of P, and a proof
that P is provable.  There are similarly sharp distinctions between
P, wanting P, believing P, wanting to believe P, and believing that
you believe P.)

There's different kinds of belief in belief. You may believe in
belief explicitly; you may recite in your deliberate stream of
consciousness the verbal sentence "It is virtuous to believe that
the Ultimate Cosmic Sky is perfectly blue and perfectly green."
(While also believing that you believe this, unless you are
unusually capable of acknowledging your own lack of virtue.) But
there's also less explicit forms of belief in belief. Maybe the
dragon-claimant fears the public ridicule that he imagines will
result if he publicly confesses he was wrong (although, in fact, a
rationalist would congratulate him, and others are more likely to
ridicule him if he goes on claiming there's a dragon in his
garage). Maybe the dragon-claimant flinches away from the prospect
of admitting to himself that there is no dragon, because it
conflicts with his self-image as the glorious discoverer of the
dragon, who saw in his garage what all others had failed to see.

If all our thoughts were deliberate verbal sentences like
philosophers manipulate, the human mind would be a great deal
easier for humans to understand. Fleeting mental images, unspoken
flinches, desires acted upon without acknowledgement - these
account for as much of ourselves as words.

While I disagree with Dennett on some details and complications, I
still think that Dennett's notion of *belief in belief* is the key
insight necessary to understand the dragon-claimant. But we need a
wider concept of *belief,* not limited to verbal sentences.
"Belief" should include unspoken anticipation-controllers.  "Belief
in belief" should include unspoken cognitive-behavior-guiders. It
is not psychologically realistic to say "The dragon-claimant does
not believe there is a dragon in his garage; he believes it is
beneficial to believe there is a dragon in his garage."  But it is
realistic to say the dragon-claimant *anticipates as if* there is
no dragon in his garage, and *makes excuses as if* he believed in
the belief.

You can possess an ordinary mental picture of your garage, with no
dragons in it, which correctly predicts your experiences on opening
the door, and never once think the verbal phrase
*There is no dragon in my garage.* I even bet it's happened to you
- that when you open your garage door or bedroom door or whatever,
and expect to see no dragons, no such verbal phrase runs through
your mind.

And to flinch away from giving up your belief in the dragon - or
flinch away from giving up your *self-image* as a person who
believes in the dragon - it is not necessary to explicitly think
*I want to believe there's a dragon in my garage.* It is only
necessary to flinch away from the prospect of admitting you don't
believe.

To correctly anticipate, in advance, which experimental results
shall need to be excused, the dragon-claimant must (a) possess an
accurate anticipation-controlling model somewhere in his mind, and
(b) act cognitively to protect either (b1) his free-floating
propositional belief in the dragon or (b2) his self-image of
believing in the dragon.

If someone believes in their belief in the dragon, and also
believes in the dragon, the problem is much less severe.  They will
be willing to stick their neck out on experimental predictions, and
perhaps even agree to give up the belief if the experimental
prediction is wrong - although belief in belief can still interfere
with this, if the belief itself is not absolutely confident.  When
someone makes up excuses *in advance,*it would seem to require that
belief, and belief in belief, have become unsynchronized.

# Bayesian Judo

You can have some fun with people whose
[anticipations get out of sync with what they believe they believe](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i4/belief_in_belief/).

I was once at a dinner party, trying to explain to a man what I did
for a living, when he said: "I don't believe Artificial
Intelligence is possible because only God can make a soul."

At this point I must have been divinely inspired, because I
instantly responded: "You mean if I can make an Artificial
Intelligence, it proves your religion is false?"



He said, "What?"

I said, "Well, if your religion predicts that I can't possibly make
an Artificial Intelligence, then, if I make an Artificial
Intelligence, it means your religion is false. Either your religion
allows that it might be possible for me to build an AI; or, if I
build an AI, that disproves your religion."

There was a pause, as the one realized he had just made his
hypothesis vulnerable to falsification, and then he said, "Well, I
didn't mean that you couldn't make an intelligence, just that it
couldn't be emotional in the same way we are."

I said, "So if I make an Artificial Intelligence that, without
being deliberately preprogrammed with any sort of script, starts
talking about an emotional life that sounds like ours, *that* means
your religion is wrong."

He said, "Well, um, I guess we may have to agree to disagree on
this."

I said: "No, we can't, actually. There's a theorem of rationality
called Aumann's Agreement Theorem which shows that no two
rationalists can agree to disagree. If two people disagree with
each other, at least one of them must be doing something wrong."

We went back and forth on this briefly. Finally, he said, "Well, I
guess I was really trying to say that I don't think you can make
something eternal."

I said, "Well, I don't think so either! I'm glad we were able to
reach agreement on this, as Aumann's Agreement Theorem requires." 
I stretched out my hand, and he shook it, and then he wandered
away.

A woman who had stood nearby, listening to the conversation, said
to me gravely, "That was beautiful."

"Thank you very much," I said.

# Professing and Cheering

I once attended a panel on the topic, "Are science and religion
compatible?" One of the women on the panel, a pagan, held forth
interminably upon how she believed that the Earth had been created
when a giant primordial cow was born into the primordial abyss, who
licked a primordial god into existence, whose descendants killed a
primordial giant and used its corpse to create the Earth, etc. The
tale was long, and detailed, and more absurd than the Earth being
supported on the back of a giant turtle. And the speaker clearly
knew enough science to know this.

I still find myself struggling for words to describe what I saw as
this woman spoke. She spoke with... pride? Self-satisfaction? A
deliberate flaunting of herself?



The woman went on describing her creation myth for what seemed like
forever, but was probably only five minutes. That strange
pride/satisfaction/flaunting clearly had something to do with her
*knowing* that her beliefs were scientifically outrageous. And it
wasn't that she hated science; as a panelist she professed that
religion and science were compatible. She even talked about how it
was quite understandable that the Vikings talked about a primordial
abyss, given the land in which they lived - explained away her own
religion! - and yet nonetheless insisted this was what she
"believed", said with peculiar satisfaction.

I'm not sure that Daniel Dennett's concept of
"[belief in belief](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i4/belief_in_belief/)" stretches to cover
this event. It was weirder than that. She didn't recite her
creation myth with the fanatical faith of someone who needs to
reassure herself. She didn't act like she expected us, the
audience, to be convinced - or like she needed our belief to
validate her.

Dennett, in addition to suggesting belief in belief, has also
suggested that much of what is called "religious belief" should
really be studied as "religious profession". Suppose an alien
anthropologist studied a group of postmodernist English students
who all seemingly *believed* that Wulky Wilkensen was a
post-utopian author. The appropriate question may not be "Why do
the students all believe this strange belief?" but "Why do they all
write this strange sentence on quizzes?" Even if a sentence is
essentially meaningless, you can still know when you are supposed
to chant the response aloud.

I think Dennett may be slightly too cynical in suggesting that
religious profession is *just* saying the belief aloud - most
people are honest enough that, if they say a religious statement
aloud, they will also feel obligated to say the verbal sentence
into their own stream of consciousness.

But even the concept of "religious profession" doesn't seem to
cover the pagan woman's claim to believe in the primordial cow. If
you had to profess a religious belief to satisfy a priest, or
satisfy a co-religionist - heck, to satisfy your own self-image as
a religious person - you would have to *pretend*to believe
*much more convincingly* than this woman was doing. As she recited
her tale of the primordial cow, with that same strange flaunting
pride, she wasn't even *trying* to be persuasive - wasn't even
trying to convince us that she took her own religion seriously. I
think that's the part that so took me aback. I know people who
believe they believe ridiculous things, but when they profess them,
they'll spend much more effort to convince themselves that they
take their beliefs seriously.

It finally occurred to me that this woman wasn't trying to convince
us or even convince herself. Her recitation of the creation story
wasn't *about* the creation of the world at all. Rather, by
launching into a five-minute diatribe about the primordial cow, she
was *cheering* *for paganism,* like holding up a banner at a
football game. A banner saying
"[GO BLUES](http://lesswrong.com/lw/gt/a_fable_of_science_and_politics/)" isn't a
statement of fact, or an attempt to persuade; it doesn't have to be
convincing - it's a cheer.

That strange flaunting pride... it was like she was marching naked
in a gay pride parade. (Incidentally, I'd have no objection if she
*had* marched naked in a gay pride parade. Lesbianism is not
something that [truth can destroy](http://lesswrong.com/lw/hp/feeling_rational/).) It
wasn't just a cheer, like marching, but an outrageous cheer, like
marching naked - believing that she couldn't be arrested or
criticized, because she was doing it for her pride parade.

That's why it mattered to her that what she was saying was beyond
ridiculous. If she'd tried to make it sound more plausible, it
would have been like putting on clothes.

# Belief as Attire

I have so far distinguished between belief as
[anticipation-controller](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i3/making_beliefs_pay_rent_in_anticipated_experiences/),
[belief in belief](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i4/belief_in_belief/),
[professing and cheering](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i6/professing_and_cheering/).  Of
these, we might call anticipation-controlling beliefs "proper
beliefs" and the other forms "improper belief".  A proper belief
can be wrong or irrational, e.g., someone who genuinely anticipates
that prayer will cure her sick baby, but the other forms are
arguably "not belief at all".

Yet another form of improper belief is belief as
group-identification - as a way of belonging.  Robin Hanson uses
the excellent
[metaphor](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/08/professing-and-.html#comment-78160476)
of wearing unusual clothing, a group uniform like a priest's
vestments or a Jewish skullcap, and so I will call this "belief as
attire".

In terms of
[humanly realistic psychology](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i0/are_your_enemies_innately_evil/),
the Muslims who flew planes into the World Trade Center undoubtedly
saw themselves as heroes defending truth, justice, and the Islamic
Way from hideous alien monsters a la the movie
[Independence Day](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0116629/).  Only a
very inexperienced nerd, the sort of nerd who has no idea how
non-nerds see the world, would say this out loud in an Alabama
bar.  It is not an American thing to say.  The American thing to
say is that the terrorists "hate our freedom" and that flying a
plane into a building is a "cowardly act".  You cannot say the
phrases "heroic self-sacrifice" and "suicide bomber" in the same
sentence, even for the sake of accurately describing how the Enemy
sees the world.   The very *concept* of the courage and altruism of
a suicide bomber is Enemy attire - you can tell, because the Enemy
talks about it.  The cowardice and sociopathy of a suicide bomber
is American attire.  There are no quote marks you can use to talk
about how the Enemy sees the world; it would be like dressing up as
a Nazi for Halloween.



Belief-as-attire may help explain how people can be *passionate*
about improper beliefs.  Mere
[belief in belief](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i4/belief_in_belief/), or
[religious professing](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i6/professing_and_cheering/), would have
some trouble creating genuine, deep, powerful emotional effects. 
Or so I suspect; I confess I'm not an expert here.  But my
impression is this:  People who've stopped anticipating-as-if their
religion is true, will go to great lengths to *convince* themselves
they are passionate, and this desperation can be mistaken for
passion.  But it's not the same fire they had as a child.

On the other hand, it is very easy for a human being to genuinely,
passionately, gut-level belong to a group, to cheer
for[their favorite sports team](http://lesswrong.com/lw/gt/a_fable_of_science_and_politics/). 
(This is the foundation on which rests the swindle of "Republicans
vs. Democrats" and analogous
[false dilemmas](http://lesswrong.com/lw/hu/the_third_alternative/) in other countries,
but that's a topic for another post.)  Identifying with a tribe is
a very strong emotional force.  People will die for it.  And once
you get people to identify with a tribe, the beliefs which are
attire of that tribe will be spoken with the full passion of
belonging to that tribe.

# Focus Your Uncertainty

Will bond yields go up, or down, or remain the same? If you're a TV
pundit and your job is to explain the outcome after the fact, then
there's no reason to worry. No matter *which* of the three
possibilities comes true, you'll be able to explain why the outcome
perfectly fits your pet market theory . There's no reason to think
of these three possibilities as somehow *opposed* to one another,
as *exclusive,* because you'll get full marks for punditry no
matter which outcome occurs.

But wait! Suppose you're a *novice* TV pundit, and you aren't
experienced enough to make up plausible explanations on the spot.
You need to prepare remarks in advance for tomorrow's broadcast,
and you have limited time to prepare. In this case, it would be
helpful to know *which* outcome will actually occur - whether bond
yields will go up, down, or remain the same - because then you
would only need to prepare *one* set of excuses.

Alas, no one can possibly foresee the future. What are you to do?
You certainly can't use "probabilities". We all
[know from school](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i2/two_more_things_to_unlearn_from_school/)
that "probabilities" are little numbers that appear next to a word
problem, and there aren't any little numbers here. Worse, you
*feel* uncertain. You don't remember *feeling* uncertain while you
were manipulating the little numbers in word problems.
*College classes teaching math*are nice clean places, therefore
*math itself* can't apply to life situations that aren't nice and
clean.  You wouldn't want to inappropriately
[transfer thinking skills from one context to another](http://www.aft.org/pubs-reports/american_educator/issues/summer07/Crit_Thinking.pdf). 
Clearly, this is not a matter for "probabilities".



Nonetheless, you only have 100 minutes to prepare your excuses. You
can't spend the entire 100 minutes on "up", and also spend all 100
minutes on "down", and also spend all 100 minutes on "same". You've
got to prioritize somehow.

If you needed to justify your time expenditure to a review
committee, you would have to spend equal time on each possibility. 
Since there are no little numbers written down, you'd have no
documentation to justify spending different amounts of time. You
can hear the reviewers now:
*And why, Mr. Finkledinger, did you spend exactly 42 minutes on excuse \#3? Why not 41 minutes, or 43? Admit it - you're not being objective! You're playing subjective favorites!*

But, you realize with a small flash of relief, there's no review
committee to scold you. This is good, because there's a major
Federal Reserve announcement tomorrow, and it seems unlikely that
bond prices will remain the same. You don't want to spend 33
precious minutes on an excuse you don't anticipate needing.

Your mind keeps drifting to the explanations you use on television,
of why each event plausibly fits your market theory. But it rapidly
becomes clear that plausibility can't help you here - all three
events are plausible. Fittability to your pet market theory doesn't
tell you how to divide your time. There's an uncrossable gap
between your 100 minutes of time, which are conserved; versus your
ability to explain how an outcome fits your theory, which is
unlimited.

And yet... even in your uncertain state of mind, it seems that you
*anticipate* the three events differently; that you *expect* to
need some excuses more than others. And - this is the fascinating
part - when you think of something that makes it seem *more* likely
that bond prices will go up, then you feel *less* likely to need an
excuse for bond prices going down or remaining the same.

It even seems like there's a relation between how much you
anticipate each of the three outcomes, and how much time you want
to spend preparing each excuse. Of course the relation can't
actually be quantified. You have 100 minutes to prepare your
speech, but there isn't 100 of anything to divide up in this
anticipation business. (Although you do work out that, *if* some
particular outcome occurs, then your utility function is
logarithmic in time spent preparing the excuse.)

Still... your mind keeps coming back to the idea that anticipation
is limited, unlike excusability, but like time to prepare excuses.
Maybe anticipation should be treated as a *conserved resource,*
like money. Your first impulse is to try to get more anticipation,
but you soon realize that, even if you get more anticiptaion, you
won't have any more time to prepare your excuses. No, your only
course is to *allocate* your *limited supply* of anticipation as
best you can.

You're pretty sure you weren't taught anything like that in your
statistics courses. They didn't tell you what to do when you *felt*
so terribly uncertain. They didn't tell you what to do when there
were no little numbers handed to you.  Why, even if you tried to
use numbers, you might end up using any sort of numbers at all -
there's no hint what kind of math to use, if you should be using
math!  Maybe you'd end up using *pairs* of numbers, right and left
numbers, which you'd call DS for Dexter-Sinister... or who knows
what else?  (Though you do have only 100 minutes to spend preparing
excuses.)

If only there were an art of *focusing your uncertainty* - of
*squeezing* as much anticipation as possible into whichever outcome
will *actually happen!*

But what could we call an art like that?  And what would the rules
be like?

# The Virtue of Narrowness

> What is true of one apple may not be true of another apple; thus more can be said about a single apple than about all the apples in the world.

Within their own professions, people grasp the importance of
narrowness; a car mechanic knows the difference between a
carburetor and a radiator, and would not think of them both as "car
parts".  A hunter-gatherer knows the difference between a lion and
a panther.  A janitor does not wipe the floor with window cleaner,
even if the bottles look similar to one who has not mastered the
art.

Outside their own professions, people often commit the misstep of
trying to broaden a word as widely as possible, to cover as much
territory as possible.  Is it not more glorious, more wise, more
impressive, to talk about *all* the apples in the world?  How much
loftier it must be to *explain human thought in general,* without
being distracted by smaller questions, such as how humans invent
techniques for solving a Rubik's Cube.  Indeed, it scarcely seems
necessary to consider *specific* questions at all; isn't a general
theory a worthy enough accomplishment on its own?



It is the way of the curious to lift up one pebble from among a
million pebbles on the shore, and see something new about it,
something interesting, something different. You call these pebbles
"diamonds", and ask what might be special about them - what inner
qualities they might have in common, beyond the glitter you first
noticed. And then someone else comes along and says: "Why not call
*this* pebble a diamond too? And this one, and this one?" They are
enthusiastic, and they mean well. For it seems undemocratic and
exclusionary and elitist and unholistic to call some pebbles
"diamonds", and others not. It seems... *narrow-minded...* if
you'll pardon the phrase. Hardly *open,* hardly *embracing,* hardly
*communal.*

You might think it poetic, to give one word many meanings, and
thereby spread shades of connotation all around. But even poets, if
they are good poets, must learn to see the world precisely. It is
not enough to compare love to a flower. Hot jealous unconsummated
love is not the same as the love of a couple married for decades.
If you need a flower to symbolize jealous love, you must go into
the garden, and look, and make subtle distinctions - find a flower
with a heady scent, and a bright color, and thorns. Even if your
intent is to shade meanings and cast connotations, you must keep
precise track of exactly which meanings you shade and connote.

It is a necessary part of the rationalist's art - or even the
poet's art! - to focus narrowly on unusual pebbles which possess
some special quality. And look at the details which those pebbles -
and those pebbles alone! - share among each other.  This is not a
sin.

It is perfectly all right for modern evolutionary biologists to
explain *just* the patterns of living creatures, and not the
"evolution" of stars or the "evolution" of technology.  Alas, some
unfortunate souls use the same word "evolution" to cover the
naturally selected patterns of replicating life, *and* the strictly
accidental structure of stars, *and* the intelligently configured
structure of technology.  And as we all know, if people use the
same word, it must all be the same thing.  You should automatically
generalize anything you think you know about biological evolution
to technology.  Anyone who tells you otherwise must be a mere
pointless pedant.  It couldn't possibly be that your abysmal
ignorance of modern evolutionary theory is so total that you can't
tell the difference between a carburetor and a radiator.  That's
unthinkable.  No, the *other* guy - you know, the one who's studied
the math - is just too dumb to see the connections.

And what could be more virtuous than seeing connections?  Surely
the wisest of all human beings are the New Age gurus who say
"Everything is connected to everything else."  If you ever say this
aloud, you should pause, so that everyone can absorb the sheer
shock of this Deep Wisdom.

There is a trivial mapping between a graph and its complement.  A
fully connected graph, with an edge between every two vertices,
conveys the same amount of information as a graph with no edges at
all.  The important graphs are the ones where some things are *not*
connected to some other things.

When the unenlightened ones try to be profound, they draw endless
verbal comparisons between this topic, and that topic, which is
like this, which is like that; until their graph is fully connected
and also totally useless. The remedy is specific knowledge and
in-depth study. When you understand things in detail, you can see
how they are *not* alike, and start enthusiastically subtracting
edges *off* your graph.

Likewise, the important categories are the ones that do not contain
everything in the universe.  Good hypotheses can only explain some
possible outcomes, and not others.

It was perfectly all right for Isaac Newton to explain *just*
gravity, *just* the way things fall down - and how planets orbit
the Sun, and how the Moon generates the tides - but *not* the role
of money in human society or how the heart pumps blood. Sneering at
narrowness is rather reminiscent of ancient Greeks who thought that
going out and actually *looking* at things was manual labor, and
manual labor was for slaves.

As Plato put it (in *The Republic, Book VII*):

> "If anyone should throw back his head and learn something by
> staring at the varied patterns on a ceiling, apparently you would
> think that he was contemplating with his reason, when he was only
> staring with his eyes... I cannot but believe that no study makes
> the soul look on high except that which is concerned with real
> being and the unseen. Whether he gape and stare upwards, or shut
> his mouth and stare downwards, if it be things of the senses that
> he tries to learn something about, I declare he never could learn,
> for none of these things admit of knowledge: I say his soul is
> looking down, not up, even if he is floating on his back on land or
> on sea!"

Many today make a similar mistake, and think that narrow concepts
are as lowly and unlofty and unphilosophical as, say, going out and
looking at things - an endeavor only suited to the underclass.  But
rationalists - and also poets - need narrow words to express
precise thoughts; they need categories which include only some
things, and exclude others. There's nothing wrong with focusing
your mind, narrowing your categories, excluding possibilities, and
sharpening your propositions. Really, there isn't! If you make your
words too broad, you end up with something that isn't true and
doesn't even make good poetry.

*And DON'T EVEN GET ME STARTED on people who think Wikipedia is an "Artificial Intelligence", the invention of LSD was a "Singularity" or that corporations are "superintelligent"!*

# Your Strength as a Rationalist

(The following happened to me in an IRC chatroom, long enough ago
that I was still hanging around in IRC chatrooms.  Time has fuzzed
the memory and my report may be imprecise.)

So there I was, in an IRC chatroom, when someone reports that a
friend of his needs medical advice.  His friend says that he's been
having sudden chest pains, so he called an ambulance, and the
ambulance showed up, but the paramedics told him it was nothing,
and left, and now the chest pains are getting worse.  What should
his friend do?

I was confused by this story.  I remembered reading about homeless
people in New York who would call ambulances just to be taken
someplace warm, and how the paramedics always had to take them to
the emergency room, even on the 27th iteration.  Because if they
didn't, the ambulance company could be sued for lots and lots of
money.  Likewise, emergency rooms are legally obligated to treat
anyone, regardless of ability to pay.  (And the hospital absorbs
the costs, which are enormous, so hospitals are closing their
emergency rooms...  It makes you wonder what's the point of having
economists if we're just going to ignore them.)  So I didn't quite
understand how the described events could have happened.  *Anyone*
reporting sudden chest pains should have been hauled off by an
ambulance instantly.

And this is where I fell down as a rationalist.  I remembered
several occasions where my doctor would completely fail to panic at
the report of symptoms that seemed, to me, very alarming.  And the
Medical Establishment was always right.  Every single time.  I had
chest pains myself, at one point, and the doctor patiently
explained to me that I was describing chest muscle pain, not a
heart attack.  So I said into the IRC channel, "Well, if the
paramedics told your friend it was nothing, it must *really be*
nothing - they'd have hauled him off if there was the tiniest
chance of serious trouble."

Thus I managed to explain the story within my existing model,
though the fit still felt a little forced...



Later on, the fellow comes back into the IRC chatroom and says his
friend made the whole thing up.  Evidently this was not one of his
more reliable friends.

I should have realized, perhaps, that an unknown acquaintance of an
acquaintance in an IRC channel might be
[less reliable](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/08/truth-bias.html)
than a published journal article.  Alas, belief is easier than
disbelief;
[we believe instinctively, but disbelief requires a conscious effort](http://www.wjh.harvard.edu/~dtg/Gilbert%20et%20al%20(EVERYTHING%20YOU%20READ).pdf).

So instead, by dint of mighty straining, I forced my model of
reality to explain an anomaly that *never actually happened.*  And
I *knew* how embarrassing this was.  I *knew* that the usefulness
of a model is not what it can explain, but what it can't.  A
hypothesis that forbids nothing, permits everything, and thereby
fails to
[constrain anticipation](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i3/making_beliefs_pay_rent_in_anticipated_experiences/).

Your strength as a rationalist is your ability to be more confused
by fiction than by reality.  If you are equally good at explaining
any outcome, you have zero knowledge.

We are all weak, from time to time; the sad part is that I *could*
have been stronger.  I had all the information I needed to arrive
at the correct answer, I even *noticed* the problem, and then I
ignored it.  My feeling of confusion was a Clue, and I threw my
Clue away.

I should have paid more attention to that sensation of
*still feels a little forced.* It's one of the most important
feelings a truthseeker can have, a part of your strength as a
rationalist.  It is a design flaw in human cognition that this
sensation manifests as a quiet strain in the back of your mind,
instead of a wailing alarm siren and a glowing neon sign reading
"EITHER YOUR MODEL IS FALSE OR THIS STORY IS WRONG."

# Absence of Evidence is Evidence of Absence

From Robyn Dawes's *Rational Choice in an Uncertain World*:

> Post-hoc fitting of evidence to hypothesis was involved in a most
> grievous chapter in United States history: the internment of
> Japanese-Americans at the beginning of the Second World War.  When
> California governor Earl Warren testified before a congressional
> hearing in San Francisco on February 21, 1942, a questioner pointed
> out that there had been no sabotage or any other type of espionage
> by the Japanese-Americans up to that time.  Warren responded, "I
> take the view that this lack [of subversive activity] is the most
> ominous sign in our whole situation. It convinces me more than
> perhaps any other factor that the sabotage we are to get, the Fifth
> Column activities are to get, are timed just like Pearl Harbor was
> timed... I believe we are just being lulled into a false sense of
> security."

Consider Warren's argument from a
[Bayesian perspective](http://yudkowsky.net/bayes/bayes.html). 
When we see evidence, hypotheses that assigned a *higher*
likelihood to that evidence, gain probability at the expense of
hypotheses that assigned a *lower* likelihood to the evidence. 
This is a phenomenon of *relative* likelihoods and *relative*
probabilities.  You can assign a high likelihood to the evidence
and still lose probability mass to some other hypothesis, if that
other hypothesis assigns a likelihood that is even higher.

Warren seems to be arguing that, given that we see no sabotage,
this *confirms* that a Fifth Column exists.  You could argue that a
Fifth Column *might* delay its sabotage.  But the likelihood is
still higher that the *absence* of a Fifth Column would perform an
absence of sabotage.

Let E stand for the observation of sabotage, H1 for the hypothesis
of a Japanese-American Fifth Column, and H2 for the hypothesis that
no Fifth Column exists.  Whatever the likelihood that a Fifth
Column would do no sabotage, the probability P(E|H1), it cannot be
as large as the likelihood that no Fifth Column does no sabotage,
the probability P(E|H2).  So observing a lack of sabotage increases
the probability that no Fifth Column exists.

A lack of sabotage doesn't *prove* that no Fifth Column exists. 
Absence of *proof* is not *proof* of absence.  In logic, A-\>B, "A
implies B", is not equivalent to \~A-\>\~B, "not-A implies not-B".

But in probability theory, absence of *evidence* is always
*evidence* of absence.   If E is a binary event and P(H|E) \> P(H),
"seeing E increases the probability of H"; then P(H|\~E) < P(H),
"failure to observe E decreases the probability of H".  P(H) is a
weighted mix of P(H|E) and P(H|\~E), and necessarily lies between
the two.  If any of this sounds at all confusing, see
[An Intuitive Explanation of Bayesian Reasoning](http://yudkowsky.net/bayes/bayes.html).

Under the vast majority of real-life circumstances, a cause may not
reliably produce signs of itself, but the absence of the cause is
even less likely to produce the signs.  The absence of an
observation may be strong evidence of absence or very weak evidence
of absence, depending on how likely the cause is to produce the
observation.  The absence of an observation that is only weakly
permitted (even if the alternative hypothesis does not allow it at
all), is very weak evidence of absence (though it is evidence
nonetheless).  This is the fallacy of "gaps in the fossil record" -
fossils form only rarely; it is futile to trumpet the absence of a
weakly permitted observation when many strong positive observations
have already been recorded.  But if there are *no* positive
observations at all, it is time to worry; hence the Fermi Paradox.

[Your strength as a rationalist](http://lesswrong.com/lw/if/your_strength_as_a_rationalist/)
is your ability to be more confused by fiction than by reality; if
you are equally good at explaining any outcome you have zero
knowledge.  The strength of a model is not what it *can* explain,
but what it *can't*, for only prohibitions
[constrain anticipation](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i4/belief_in_belief/).  If you don't
notice when your model makes the evidence unlikely, you might as
well have no model, and also you might as well have no evidence; no
brain and no eyes.

# Conservation of Expected Evidence

Friedrich Spee von Langenfeld, a priest who heard the confessions
of condemned witches, wrote in 1631 the *Cautio Criminalis*
('prudence in criminal cases') in which he bitingly described the
decision tree for condemning accused witches:  If the witch had led
an evil and improper life, she was guilty; if she had led a good
and proper life, this too was a proof, for witches dissemble and
try to appear especially virtuous. After the woman was put in
prison: if she was afraid, this proved her guilt; if she was not
afraid, this proved her guilt, for witches characteristically
pretend innocence and wear a bold front. Or on hearing of a
denunciation of witchcraft against her, she might seek flight or
remain; if she ran, that proved her guilt; if she remained, the
devil had detained her so she could not get away.

Spee acted as confessor to many witches; he was thus in a position
to observe *every* branch of the accusation tree, that no matter
*what* the accused witch said or did, it was held a proof against
her.  In any individual case, you would only hear one branch of the
dilemma.  It is for this reason that scientists write down their
experimental predictions in advance.

But *you can't have it both ways* - as a matter of probability
theory, not mere fairness.  The rule that
"[absence of evidence *is* evidence of absence](http://lesswrong.com/lw/ih/absence_of_evidence_is_evidence_of_absence/)"
is a special case of a more general law, which I would name
Conservation of Expected Evidence:  The *expectation* of the
posterior probability, after viewing the evidence, must equal the
prior probability.

> **P(H) = P(H)****  
> P(H) = P(H,E) + P(H,\~E)****  
> P(H) = P(H|E)\*P(E) + P(H|\~E)\*P(\~E)**

*Therefore,* for every expectation of evidence, there is an equal
and opposite expectation of counterevidence.

If you expect a strong probability of seeing weak evidence in one
direction, it must be balanced by a weak expectation of seeing
strong evidence in the other direction.  If you're very confident
in your theory, and therefore anticipate seeing an outcome that
matches your hypothesis, this can only provide a very small
increment to your belief (it is already close to 1); but the
unexpected failure of your prediction would (and must) deal your
confidence a huge blow.  On *average,* you must expect to be
*exactly* as confident as when you started out.  Equivalently, the
mere *expectation* of encountering evidence - before you've
actually seen it - should not shift your prior beliefs.  (Again, if
this is not intuitively obvious, see
[An Intuitive Explanation of Bayesian Reasoning](http://yudkowsky.net/bayes/bayes.html).)

So if you
[claim](http://lesswrong.com/lw/ih/absence_of_evidence_is_evidence_of_absence/) that
"no sabotage" is evidence *for*the existence of a Japanese-American
Fifth Column, you must conversely hold that seeing sabotage would
argue *against* a Fifth Column.  If you claim that "a good and
proper life" is evidence that a woman is a witch, then an evil and
improper life must be evidence that she is not a witch.  If you
[argue](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i8/religions_claim_to_be_nondisprovable/) that God, to
test humanity's faith, refuses to reveal His existence, then the
miracles described in the Bible must argue against the existence of
God.

Doesn't quite sound right, does it?  Pay attention to that feeling
of *this seems a little forced,* that
[quiet strain in the back of your mind](http://lesswrong.com/lw/if/your_strength_as_a_rationalist/). 
It's important.

For a true Bayesian, it is impossible to seek evidence that
*confirms* a theory.  There is no possible plan you can devise, no
clever strategy, no cunning device, by which you can legitimately
expect your confidence in a fixed proposition to be higher (on
*average*) than before.  You can only ever seek evidence to *test*
a theory, not to confirm it.

This realization can take quite a load off your mind.  You need not
worry about how to interpret every possible experimental result to
confirm your theory.  You needn't bother planning how to make *any*
given iota of evidence confirm your theory, because you know that
for every expectation of evidence, there is an equal and oppositive
expectation of counterevidence.  If you try to weaken the
counterevidence of a possible "abnormal" observation, you can only
do it by weakening the support of a "normal" observation, to a
precisely equal and opposite degree.  It is a zero-sum game.  No
matter how you connive, no matter how you argue, no matter how you
strategize, you can't possibly expect the resulting game plan to
shift your beliefs (on average) in a particular direction.

You might as well sit back and relax while you wait for the
evidence to come in.

...human psychology is *so* screwed up.

# Hindsight Bias

*Hindsight bias* is when people who know the answer vastly
overestimate its *predictability* or *obviousness,* compared to the
estimates of subjects who must guess without advance knowledge. 
Hindsight bias is sometimes called the
*I-knew-it-all-along effect*.

Fischhoff and Beyth (1975) presented students with historical
accounts of unfamiliar incidents, such as a conflict between the
Gurkhas and the British in 1814.  Given the account as background
knowledge, five groups of students were asked what they would have
predicted as the probability for each of four outcomes: British
victory, Gurkha victory, stalemate with a peace settlement, or
stalemate with no peace settlement.  Four experimental groups were
respectively told that these four outcomes were the historical
outcome.  The fifth, control group was not told any historical
outcome.  In every case, a group told an outcome assigned
substantially higher probability to that outcome, than did any
other group or the control group.

Hindsight bias matters in legal cases, where a judge or jury must
determine whether a defendant was legally negligent in failing to
foresee a hazard (Sanchiro 2003). In an experiment based on an
actual legal case, Kamin and Rachlinski (1995) asked two groups to
estimate the probability of flood damage caused by blockage of a
city-owned drawbridge. The control group was told only the
background information known to the city when it decided not to
hire a bridge watcher. The experimental group was given this
information, plus the fact that a flood had actually occurred.
Instructions stated the city was negligent if the foreseeable
probability of flooding was greater than 10%. 76% of the control
group concluded the flood was so unlikely that no precautions were
necessary; 57% of the experimental group concluded the flood was so
likely that failure to take precautions was legally negligent. A
third experimental group was told the outcome andalso explicitly
instructed to avoid hindsight bias, which made no difference: 56%
concluded the city was legally negligent.

Viewing history through the lens of hindsight, we vastly
underestimate the cost of effective safety precautions.  In 1986,
the *Challenger* exploded for reasons traced to an O-ring losing
flexibility at low temperature.  There were warning signs of a
problem with the O-rings.  But preventing the *Challenger* disaster
would have required, not attending to the problem with the O-rings,
but attending to *every* warning sign which seemed as severe as the
O-ring problem, *without benefit of hindsight*.  It could have been
done, but it would have required a *general policy* much more
expensive than just fixing the O-Rings.

Shortly after September 11th 2001, I thought to myself,
*and now someone will turn up minor intelligence warnings of something-or-other, and then the hindsight will begin.* 
Yes, I'm sure they had some minor warnings of an al Qaeda plot, but
they probably also had minor warnings of mafia activity, nuclear
material for sale, and an invasion from Mars.

Because we don't see the cost of a general policy, we learn overly
specific lessons.  After September 11th, the FAA prohibited
box-cutters on airplanes - as if the problem had been the failure
to take *this particular* "obvious" precaution.  We don't learn the
general lesson:
*the cost of effective caution is very high because you must attend to problems that are not as obvious now as past problems seem in hindsight.*

The test of a model is how much probability it assigns to the
observed outcome.  Hindsight bias systematically distorts this
test; we think our model assigned much more probability than it
actually did.  Instructing the jury doesn't help.  You have to
[write down your predictions in advance](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/08/conservation-of.html). 
Or as Fischhoff (1982) put it:

> When we attempt to understand past events, we implicitly test the
> hypotheses or rules we use both to interpret and to anticipate the
> world around us. If, in hindsight, we systematically underestimate
> the surprises that the past held and holds for us, we are
> subjecting those hypotheses to inordinately weak tests and,
> presumably, finding little reason to change them.


* * * * *

Fischhoff, B. 1982. For those condemned to study the past:
Heuristics and biases in hindsight. In Kahneman et. al. 1982:
332â351.

Fischhoff, B., and Beyth, R. 1975. I knew it would happen:
Remembered probabilities of once-future things. Organizational
Behavior and Human Performance, 13: 1-16.

Kamin, K. and Rachlinski, J. 1995.
[Ex Post â  Ex Ante: Determining Liability in Hindsight](http://www.jstor.org/view/01477307/ap050075/05a00120/0).
Law and Human Behavior, 19(1): 89-104.

Sanchiro, C. 2003. Finding Error. Mich. St. L. Rev. 1189.

# Hindsight Devalues Science

This
[excerpt](http://csml.som.ohio-state.edu/Music829C/hindsight.bias.html)
from Meyers's *Exploring Social Psychology* is worth reading in
entirety.  Cullen Murphy, editor of *The Atlantic,* said that the
social sciences turn up "no ideas or conclusions that can't be
found in [any] encyclopedia of quotations... Day after day social
scientists go out into the world.  Day after day they discover that
people's behavior is pretty much what you'd expect."

Of course, the "expectation" is all
[hindsight](http://lesswrong.com/lw/il/hindsight_bias/).  (Hindsight bias:  Subjects
who know the actual answer to a question assign much higher
probabilities they "would have" guessed for that answer, compared
to subjects who must guess without knowing the answer.)

The historian Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. dismissed scientific studies
of WWII soldiers' experiences as "ponderous demonstrations" of
common sense.  For example:

1.  Better educated soldiers suffered more adjustment problems than
    less educated soldiers. (Intellectuals were less prepared for
    battle stresses than street-smart people.)  
2.  Southern soldiers coped better with the hot South Sea Island
    climate than Northern soldiers. (Southerners are more accustomed to
    hot weather.)  
3.  White privates were more eager to be promoted to
    noncommissioned officers than Black privates. (Years of oppression
    take a toll on achievement motivation.)  
4.  Southern Blacks preferred Southern to Northern White officers
    (because Southern officers were more experienced and skilled in
    interacting with Blacks).  
5.  As long as the fighting continued, soldiers were more eager to
    return home than after the war ended. (During the fighting,
    soldiers knew they were in mortal danger.)  

How many of these findings do you think you *could have* predicted
in advance?   3 out of 5?  4 out of 5?  Are there any cases where
you would have predicted the opposite - where your model
[takes a hit](http://lesswrong.com/lw/ii/conservation_of_expected_evidence/)?  Take a
moment to think before continuing...

In this demonstration (from Paul Lazarsfeld by way of Meyers), all
of the findings above are the *opposite* of what was actually
found.  How many times did you think your model took a hit?  How
many times did you admit you would have been wrong?  That's how
good your model really was.  The measure of
[your strength as a rationalist](http://lesswrong.com/lw/if/your_strength_as_a_rationalist/)
is your ability to be more confused by fiction than by reality.

Unless, of course, I reversed the results again.  What do you
think?

Do your thought processes at this point, where you *really don't*
know the answer, feel different from the thought processes you used
to rationalize either side of the "known" answer?

Daphna Baratz exposed college students to pairs of supposed
findings, one true ("In prosperous times people spend a larger
portion of their income than during a recession") and one the
truth's opposite.  In both sides of the pair, students rated the
supposed finding as what they "would have predicted".  Perfectly
standard hindsight bias.

Which leads people to think they have no need for science, because
they "could have predicted" that.

(Just as you would expect, right?)

Hindsight will lead us to systematically undervalue the
surprisingness of scientific findings, especially the discoveries
we *understand* - the ones that seem real to us, the ones we can
retrofit into our models of the world.  If you understand neurology
or physics and read news in that topic, then you probably
underestimate the surprisingness of findings in those fields too. 
This unfairly devalues the contribution of the researchers; and
worse, will prevent you from noticing when you are seeing evidence
that[doesn't fit](http://lesswrong.com/lw/ii/conservation_of_expected_evidence/) what
you *really* would have expected.

We need to make a conscious effort to be shocked *enough.*

# Fake Explanations

Once upon a time, there was an instructor who taught physics
students.  One day she called them into her class, and showed them
a wide, square plate of metal, next to a hot radiator.  The
students each put their hand on the plate, and found the side next
to the radiator cool, and the distant side warm.  And the
instructor said, *Why do you think this happens?*  Some students
guessed convection of air currents, and others guessed strange
metals in the plate.  They devised many creative explanations, none
stooping so low as to say "I don't know" or
"[This seems impossible.](http://lesswrong.com/lw/if/your_strength_as_a_rationalist/)"

And the answer was that before the students entered the room, the
instructor turned the plate around.

Consider the student who frantically stammers, "Eh, maybe because
of the heat conduction and so?"  I ask: is this answer a
[proper belief](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i7/belief_as_attire/)?  The words are easily
enough [professed](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i6/professing_and_cheering/) - said in a
loud, emphatic voice.  But do the words actually
[control anticipation](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i4/belief_in_belief/)?

Ponder that innocent little phrase, "because of", which comes
before "heat conduction".  Ponder some of the *other* things we
could put after it.  We could say, for example, "Because of
phlogiston", or "Because of magic."

"Magic!" you cry.  "That's not a *scientific* explanation!" 
Indeed, the phrases "because of heat conduction" and "because of
magic" are readily recognized as belonging to different
*literary genres.*  "Heat conduction" is something that Spock might
say on *Star Trek*, whereas "magic" would be said by Giles in
*Buffy the Vampire Slayer*.

However, as Bayesians, we take no notice of literary genres.  For
us, the substance of a model is the control it exerts on
anticipation.  If you say "heat conduction", what experience does
that lead you to *anticipate?*  Under normal circumstances, it
leads you to anticipate that, if you put your hand on the side of
the plate near the radiator, that side will feel warmer than the
opposite side.  If "because of heat conduction" can also explain
the radiator-adjacent side feeling *cooler,* then it can explain
pretty much *anything.*

[And](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i3/making_beliefs_pay_rent_in_anticipated_experiences/)
[as](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i4/belief_in_belief/) [we](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i5/bayesian_judo/)
[all](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i6/professing_and_cheering/)
[know](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i7/belief_as_attire/)
[by](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i8/religions_claim_to_be_nondisprovable/)
[this](http://lesswrong.com/lw/ia/focus_your_uncertainty/)
[point](http://lesswrong.com/lw/if/your_strength_as_a_rationalist/)
([I](http://lesswrong.com/lw/ih/absence_of_evidence_is_evidence_of_absence/)
[do](http://lesswrong.com/lw/im/hindsight_devalues_science/)
[hope](http://lesswrong.com/lw/ii/conservation_of_expected_evidence/)), if you are
equally good at explaining any outcome, you have zero knowledge. 
"Because of heat conduction", used in such fashion, is a disguised
hypothesis of maximum entropy.  It is anticipation-isomorphic to
saying "magic".  It feels like an explanation, but it's not.

Supposed that instead of guessing, we measured the heat of the
metal plate at various points and various times.  Seeing a metal
plate next to the radiator, we would ordinarily expect the point
temperatures to satisfy an equilibrium of the diffusion equation
with respect to the boundary conditions imposed by the
environment.  You might not know the exact temperature of the first
point measured, but after measuring the first points - I'm not
physicist enough to know how many would be required - you could
take an excellent guess at the rest.

A true master of the art of using numbers to constrain the
anticipation of material phenomena - a "physicist" - would take
some measurements and say, "This plate was in equilibrium with the
environment two and a half minutes ago, turned around, and is now
approaching equilibrium again."

The deeper error of the students is not simply that they failed to
constrain anticipation.  Their deeper error is that they thought
they were doing physics.  They said the phrase "because of",
followed by the sort of words Spock might say on *Star Trek,* and
thought they thereby entered the magisterium of science.

Not so.  They simply moved their magic from one literary genre to
another.

# Guessing the Teachers Password

When I was young, I read popular physics books such as Richard
Feynman's
*QED: The [Strange](http://lesswrong.com/lw/hs/think_like_reality/) Theory of Light and Matter.* 
I knew that light was waves, sound was waves, matter was waves.  I
took pride in my scientific literacy, when I was nine years old.

When I was older, and I began to read the
*Feynman Lectures on Physics,* I ran across a gem called "the wave
equation".  I could follow the equation's derivation, but,
[looking back](http://www.math.utah.edu/~pa/math/polya.html), I
couldn't see its truth at a glance.  So I thought about the wave
equation for three days, on and off, until I saw that it was
embarrassingly obvious.  And when I finally understood, I realized
that the whole time I had accepted the honest assurance of
physicists that light was waves, sound was waves, matter was waves,
I had not had the vaguest idea of what the word "wave" meant to a
physicist.

There is an instinctive tendency to think that if a physicist says
"light is made of waves", and the teacher says "What is light made
of?", and the student says "Waves!", the student has made a true
statement.  That's only fair, right?  We accept "waves" as a
correct answer from the physicist; wouldn't it be unfair to reject
it from the student?  Surely, the answer "Waves!" is either *true*
or *false,* right?* *



Which is one more bad habit to
[unlearn from school](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i2/two_more_things_to_unlearn_from_school/).
Words do not have intrinsic definitions. If I hear the syllables
"bea-ver" and think of a large rodent, that is a fact about my own
state of mind, not a fact about the syllables "bea-ver".  The
sequence of syllables "made of waves" (or
"[because of heat conduction](http://lesswrong.com/lw/ip/fake_explanations/)") is not a
*hypothesis,* it is a pattern of vibrations traveling through the
air, or ink on paper.  It can *associate* to a hypothesis in
someone's mind, but it is not, of itself, right or wrong.  But in
school, the teacher hands you a gold star for *saying* "made of
waves", which must be the correct answer because the teacher heard
a physicist emit the same sound-vibrations.  Since verbal behavior
(spoken or written) is what gets the gold star, students begin to
think that verbal behavior has a truth-value.  After all, either
light is made of waves, or it isn't, right?

And this leads into an even worse habit.  Suppose the teacher
presents you with a [confusing problem](http://lesswrong.com/lw/ip/fake_explanations/)
involving a metal plate next to a radiator; the far side feels
warmer than the side next to the radiator.  The teacher asks
"Why?"  If you say "I don't know", you have *no* chance of getting
a gold star - it won't even count as class participation.  But,
during the current semester, this teacher has used the phrases
"because of heat convection", "because of heat conduction", and
"because of radiant heat".  One of these is probably what the
teacher wants.  You say, "Eh, maybe because of heat conduction?"

This is not a* *hypothesis *about*the metal plate.  This is not
even a [proper belief](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i7/belief_as_attire/).  It is an attempt
to *guess the teacher's password.*

Even visualizing the symbols of the diffusion equation (the math
governing heat conduction) doesn't mean you've formed a hypothesis
*about* the metal plate.  This is not school; we are not testing
your memory to see if you can write down the diffusion equation. 
This is Bayescraft; we are scoring your anticipations of
experience.  If you *use* the diffusion equation, by measuring a
few points with a thermometer and then trying to predict what the
thermometer will say on the next measurement, then it is definitely
connected to experience.  Even if the student just visualizes
something *flowing,* and therefore holds a match near the cooler
side of the plate to try to measure where the heat goes, then this
mental image of flowing-ness connects to experience; it controls
anticipation.

If you aren't *using* the diffusion equation - putting in numbers
and getting out results that control your anticipation of
particular experiences - then the connection between map and
territory is severed as though by a knife.  What remains
[is not a belief](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i7/belief_as_attire/), but a verbal
behavior.  
In the school system, it's all about verbal behavior, whether
written on paper or spoken aloud.  Verbal behavior gets you a gold
star or a failing grade.  Part of unlearning this bad habit is
becoming consciously aware of the difference between an explanation
and a password.

Does this seem too harsh?  When you're faced by a confusing metal
plate, can't "Heat conduction?" be a first step toward finding the
answer?  Maybe, but only if you don't fall into the trap of
thinking that you are looking for a password.  What if there is no
teacher to tell you that you failed?  Then you may think that
"Light is wakalixes" is a good explanation, that "wakalixes" is the
correct password.  It happened to me when I was nine years old -
not because I was stupid, but because this is what happens
*by default.** *This is how human beings think, unless they are
trained *not* to fall into the trap.  Humanity stayed stuck in
holes like this for thousands of years.

Maybe, if we drill students that
*words don't count, only anticipation-controllers,* the student
will *not* get stuck on "Heat conduction? No?  Maybe heat
convection?  That's not it either?"  Maybe *then,* thinking the
phrase "Heat conduction" will lead onto a genuinely helpful path,
like:

-   "Heat conduction?"
-   But that's only a phrase - what does it mean?
-   The diffusion equation?
-   But those are only symbols - how do I apply them?
-   What does applying the diffusion equation lead me to
    anticipate?
-   It sure doesn't lead me to anticipate that the side of a metal
    plate farther away from a radiator would feel warmer.
-   I [notice](http://lesswrong.com/lw/if/your_strength_as_a_rationalist/) that I am
    [confused](http://lesswrong.com/lw/im/hindsight_devalues_science/).  Maybe the near
    side just *feels* cooler, because it's made of more insulative
    material and transfers less heat to my hand?  I'll try measuring
    the temperature...
-   Okay, that wasn't it.  Can I try to verify whether the
    diffusion equation holds true of this metal plate, at all?  Is heat
    *flowing* the way it usually does, or is something else going on?
-   I could hold a match to the plate and try to measure how heat
    spreads over time...

If we are *not* strict about "Eh, maybe because of heat
conduction?" being a fake explanation, the student will very
probably get stuck on some wakalixes-password. 
*This happens by default, it happened to the whole human species for thousands of years.*

*(This post is part of the sequence [Mysterious Answers to Mysterious Questions](http://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Mysterious_Answers_to_Mysterious_Questions).)  
*

# Science as Attire

The preview for the *X-Men* movie has a voice-over saying:  "In
every human being... there is the genetic code... for mutation." 
Apparently you can acquire all sorts of neat abilities by
mutation.  The mutant Storm, for example, has the ability to throw
lightning bolts. 

I beg you, dear reader, to consider the biological machinery
necessary to generate electricity; the biological adaptations
necessary to avoid being harmed by electricity; and the cognitive
circuitry required for finely tuned control of lightning bolts.  If
we actually observed any organism acquiring these abilities
*in one generation,* as the result of *mutation,* it would outright
falsify the neo-Darwinian model of natural selection.  It would be
worse than finding rabbit fossils in the pre-Cambrian.  If
evolutionary theory could *actually* stretch to cover Storm, it
would
[be able to explain anything](http://lesswrong.com/lw/if/your_strength_as_a_rationalist/),
and we all know what that would imply.

The *X-Men* comics use terms like "evolution", "mutation", and
"genetic code", purely to place themselves in what they conceive to
be the *literary genre* of science.  The part that scares me is
wondering how many people, especially in the media, understand
science *only* as a literary genre.

I encounter people who very definitely
[believe in](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i6/professing_and_cheering/) evolution, who sneer
at the folly of creationists.  And yet they have no idea of what
the theory of evolutionary biology permits and prohibits.  They'll
talk about "the next step in the evolution of humanity", as if
natural selection got here by following a plan.  Or even worse,
they'll talk about something completely outside the domain of
evolutionary biology, like an improved design for computer chips,
or corporations splitting, or humans uploading themselves into
computers, and they'll call *that* "evolution".  If evolutionary
biology could cover that, it could cover anything.

Probably an actual majority of the people who *believe in*
evolution use the phrase
"[because of evolution](http://lesswrong.com/lw/ip/fake_explanations/)" because they
want to be part of the scientific in-crowd -
[belief as scientific attire](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i7/belief_as_attire/), like
wearing a lab coat.  If the scientific in-crowd instead used the
phrase "because of intelligent design", they would just as
cheerfully use that instead - it would make no difference to their
anticipation-controllers.  Saying "because of evolution" instead of
"because of intelligent design" does not, *for them,* prohibit
Storm.  Its only purpose, for them, is to identify with a tribe.

I encounter people who are quite willing to entertain the notion of
dumber-than-human Artificial Intelligence, or even mildly
smarter-than-human Artificial Intelligence.  Introduce the notion
of strongly superhuman Artificial Intelligence, and they'll
suddenly decide it's
"[pseudoscience](http://lesswrong.com/lw/io/is_molecular_nanotechnology_scientific/)".
It's not that they think they have a theory of intelligence which
lets them calculate a theoretical upper bound on the power of an
optimization process.  Rather, they associate strongly superhuman
AI to the *literary genre* of apocalyptic literature; whereas an AI
running a small corporation associates to the literary genre of
*Wired* magazine.  They aren't speaking from within a model of
cognition.  They don't realize they *need* a model.  They don't
realize that science is *about* models.  Their devastating
critiques consist purely of
*comparisons to apocalyptic literature*, rather than, say, known
laws which prohibit such an outcome.  They understand science
*only*as a literary genre, or in-group to belong to.  The
[attire](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i7/belief_as_attire/) doesn't look to them like a lab
coat; this isn't the football team they're
[cheering](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i6/professing_and_cheering/) for.

Is there anything in science that you are *proud* of believing, and
yet you do not use the belief professionally?  You had best ask
yourself which future experiences your belief *prohibits* from
happening to you.  That is the sum of what you have assimilated and
made a true part of yourself.  Anything else is probably
[passwords](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iq/guessing_the_teachers_password/) or
[attire](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i7/belief_as_attire/).

# Fake Causality

Phlogiston was the 18 century's answer to the Elemental Fire of the
Greek alchemists.  Ignite wood, and let it burn.  What is the
orangey-bright "fire" stuff?  Why does the wood transform into
ash?  To both questions, the 18th-century chemists answered,
"phlogiston".

...and that was it, you see, that was their answer:  "Phlogiston."

Phlogiston escaped from burning substances as visible fire.  As the
phlogiston escaped, the burning substances lost phlogiston and so
became ash, the "true material".  Flames in enclosed containers
went out because the air became saturated with phlogiston, and so
could not hold any more.  Charcoal left little residue upon burning
because it was nearly pure phlogiston.

Of course, one didn't use phlogiston theory to *predict* the
outcome of a chemical transformation.  You looked at the result
first, then you used phlogiston theory to *explain* it.  It's not
that phlogiston theorists predicted a flame would extinguish in a
closed container; rather they lit a flame in a container, watched
it go out, and then said, "The air must have become saturated with
phlogiston."  You couldn't even use phlogiston theory to
[say what you ought *not* to see](http://lesswrong.com/lw/if/your_strength_as_a_rationalist/);
it could explain everything.

This was an earlier age of science.  For a long time, no one
realized there was a problem. 
[Fake explanations](http://lesswrong.com/lw/ip/fake_explanations/) don't *feel* fake. 
That's what makes them dangerous.



Modern research suggests that humans think about cause and effect
using something like the directed acyclic graphs (DAGs) of Bayes
nets.  Because it rained, the sidewalk is wet; because the sidewalk
is wet, it is slippery:

[Rain] -\> [Sidewalk wet] -\> [Sidewalk slippery]

From this we can infer - or, in a Bayes net, rigorously calculate
in probabilities - that when the sidewalk is slippery, it probably
rained; but if we already know that the sidewalk is wet, learning
that the sidewalk is slippery tells us nothing more about whether
it rained.

Why is fire hot and bright when it burns?

["Phlogiston"] -\> [Fire hot and bright]

It *feels* like an explanation.  It's *represented* using the same
cognitive data format.  But the human mind does not automatically
detect when a cause has an unconstraining arrow to its effect.
Worse, thanks to [hindsight bias](http://lesswrong.com/lw/il/hindsight_bias/), it may
feel like the cause
[constrains](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i3/making_beliefs_pay_rent_in_anticipated_experiences/)
the effect, when it was
merely* *[fitted](http://lesswrong.com/lw/ii/conservation_of_expected_evidence/) to the
effect.

Interestingly,
[our modern understanding of probabilistic reasoning about causality](http://books.google.com/books?id=k9VsqN24pNYC&dq=&pg=PP1&ots=WR9UGWdOdd&sig=w_Mrax-y4VVwZy5SQGySphNsKMc&prev=http://www.google.com/search?hl=en&safe=off&q=pearl+intelligent+systems&btnG=Search&sa=X&oi=print&ct=title#PPA143,M1)
can describe precisely what the phlogiston theorists were doing
wrong.  One of the primary inspirations for Bayesian networks was
noticing the problem of double-counting evidence if inference
resonates between an effect and a cause.  For example, let's say
that I get a bit of unreliable information that the sidewalk is
wet.  This should make me think it's more likely to be raining. 
But, if it's more likely to be raining, doesn't that make it more
likely that the sidewalk is wet?  And wouldn't *that* make it more
likely that the sidewalk is slippery?  But if the sidewalk is
slippery, it's probably wet; and then I should again raise my
probability that it's raining...

Judea Pearl uses the metaphor of an algorithm for counting soldiers
in a line.  Suppose you're in the line, and you see two soldiers
next to you, one in front and one in back.  That's three soldiers. 
So you ask the soldier next to you, "How many soldiers do *you*
see?"  He looks around and says, "Three".  So that's a total of six
soldiers.  This, obviously, is *not* how to do it.

A smarter way is to ask the soldier in front of you, "How many
soldiers forward of you?" and the soldier in back, "How many
soldiers backward of you?"  The question "How many soldiers
forward?" can be passed on as a message without confusion.  If I'm
at the front of the line, I pass the message "1 soldier forward",
for myself.  The person directly in back of me gets the message "1
soldier forward", and passes on the message "2 soldiers forward" to
the soldier behind him.  At the same time, each soldier is also
getting the message "N soldiers backward" from the soldier behind
them, and passing it on as "N+1 soldiers backward" to the soldier
in front of them.  How many soldiers in total?  Add the two numbers
you receive, plus one for yourself: that is the total number of
soldiers in line.

The key idea is that every soldier must *separately* track the two
messages, the forward-message and backward-message, and add them
together only at the end.  You never add any soldiers from the
backward-message you receive to the forward-message you pass back. 
Indeed, the total number of soldiers is never passed as a message -
no one ever says it aloud.

An analogous principle operates in rigorous probabilistic reasoning
about causality.  If you learn something about whether it's
raining, from some source *other* than observing the sidewalk to be
wet, this will send a forward-message from [rain] to [sidewalk wet]
and raise our expectation of the sidewalk being wet.  If you
observe the sidewalk to be wet, this sends a backward-message to
our belief that it is raining, and this message propagates from
[rain] to all neighboring nodes *except* the [sidewalk wet] node. 
We count each piece of evidence exactly once; no update message
ever "bounces" back and forth.  The exact algorithm may be found in
Judea Pearl's classic
"[Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference](http://books.google.com/books?id=k9VsqN24pNYC&dq=&pg=PP1&ots=WR9UGWdOdd&sig=w_Mrax-y4VVwZy5SQGySphNsKMc&prev=http://www.google.com/search?hl=en&safe=off&q=pearl+intelligent+systems&btnG=Search&sa=X&oi=print&ct=title#PPA143,M1)".

So what went wrong in phlogiston theory?  When we observe that fire
is hot, the [fire] node can send a backward-evidence to the
["phlogiston"] node, leading us to update our beliefs about
phlogiston.  But if so, we can't count this as a successful
forward-prediction of phlogiston theory.  The message should go in
only one direction, and not bounce back.

Alas, human beings do not use a rigorous algorithm for updating
belief networks.  We learn about parent nodes from observing
children, and predict child nodes from beliefs about parents.  But
we don't keep rigorously separate books for the backward-message
and forward-message.  We just remember that phlogiston is hot,
which *causes* fire to be hot.  So it seems like phlogiston theory
predicts the hotness of fire.  Or, worse, it just feels like
*phlogiston makes the fire hot.*

Until you notice that no *advance* predictions are being made, the
non-constraining causal node is not labeled "fake".  It's
represented the same way as any other node in your belief network. 
It feels like a fact, like all the other facts you know: 
*Phlogiston makes the fire hot.*

A properly designed AI would notice the problem instantly.  This
wouldn't even require special-purpose code, just correct
bookkeeping of the belief network.  (Sadly, we humans can't rewrite
our own code, the way a properly designed AI could.)

Speaking of "[hindsight bias](http://lesswrong.com/lw/im/hindsight_devalues_science/)"
is just the nontechnical way of saying that humans do not
rigorously separate forward and backward messages, allowing forward
messages to be contaminated by backward ones.

Those who long ago went down the path of phlogiston were not trying
to be fools.  No scientist deliberately wants to get stuck in a
blind alley.  Are there any fake explanations in *your* mind?   If
there are, I guarantee they're not labeled "fake explanation", so
polling your thoughts for the "fake" keyword will not turn them
up.

Thanks to [hindsight bias](http://lesswrong.com/lw/im/hindsight_devalues_science/),
it's also not enough to check how well your theory "predicts" facts
you already know.  You've got to predict for tomorrow, not
yesterday.  It's the only way a messy human mind can be guaranteed
of sending a pure forward message.

# Semantic Stopsigns

*And the child asked:*

Q:  Where did this rock come from?  
A:  I chipped it off the big boulder, at the center of the
village.  
Q:  Where did the boulder come from?  
A:  It probably rolled off the huge mountain that towers over our
village.  
Q:  Where did the mountain come from?  
A:  The same place as all stone: it is the bones of Ymir, the
primordial giant.  
Q:  Where did the primordial giant, Ymir, come from?  
A:  From the great abyss, Ginnungagap.  
Q:  Where did the great abyss, Ginnungagap, come from?  
A:  Never ask that question.

Consider the seeming paradox of the First Cause.  Science has
traced events back to the Big Bang, but why did the Big Bang
happen?  It's all well and good to say that the zero of time begins
at the Big Bang - that there is nothing before the Big Bang in the
ordinary flow of minutes and hours.  But saying this presumes our
physical law, which itself appears highly structured; it calls out
for explanation.  Where did the physical laws come from?  You could
say that we're all a computer simulation, but then the computer
simulation is running on some other world's laws of physics - where
did *those* laws of physics come from?

At this point, some people say, "God!"



What could possibly make anyone, even a highly religious person,
think this even *helped* answer the paradox of the First Cause? 
Why wouldn't you automatically ask, "Where did God come from?" 
Saying "God is uncaused" or "God created Himself" leaves us in
exactly the same position as "Time began with the Big Bang."  We
just ask why the whole metasystem exists in the first place, or why
some events but not others are allowed to be uncaused.

My purpose here is not to discuss the seeming paradox of the First
Cause, but to ask why anyone would think "God!" *could* resolve the
paradox.  Saying "God!" is
[a way of belonging to a tribe](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i6/professing_and_cheering/),
which gives people a motive to say it as often as possible - some
people even say it for questions like "Why did this hurricane
strike New Orleans?"  Even so, you'd hope people would notice that
on the *particular* puzzle of the First Cause, saying "God!"
doesn't help.  It doesn't make the paradox seem any less
paradoxical *even if true.*  How could anyone *not* notice this?

Jonathan Wallace suggested that "God!" functions as a
*semantic stopsign* - that it isn't a propositional assertion, so
much as a cognitive traffic signal: do not think past this point. 
Saying "God!" doesn't so much resolve the paradox, as put up a
cognitive traffic signal to halt the obvious continuation of the
question-and-answer chain.

Of course *you'd* never do that, being a good and proper atheist,
right?  But "God!" isn't the *only* semantic stopsign, just the
obvious first example.

The transhuman technologies - molecular nanotechnology, advanced
biotech, genetech, Artificial Intelligence, et cetera - pose tough
policy questions.  What kind of role, if any, should a government
take in supervising a parent's choice of genes for their child? 
Could parents deliberately choose genes for schizophrenia?  If
enhancing a child's intelligence is expensive, should governments
help ensure access, to prevent the emergence of a cognitive elite? 
You can propose various institutions to answer these policy
questions - for example, that private charities should provide
financial aid for intelligence enhancement - but the obvious next
question is, "Will this institution be effective?"  If we rely on
product liability lawsuits to prevent corporations from building
harmful nanotech, will that really *work?*

I know someone whose answer to every one of these questions is
"Liberal democracy!"  That's it.  That's his answer.  If you ask
the obvious question of "How well have liberal democracies
performed, historically, on problems this tricky?" or "What if
liberal democracy does something stupid?" then you're an autocrat,
or libertopian, or otherwise a very very bad person.  No one is
allowed to question democracy.

I once called this kind of thinking "the divine right of
democracy".  But it is more precise to say that "Democracy!"
functioned for him as a semantic stopsign.  If anyone had said to
him "Turn it over to the Coca-Cola corporation!", he would have
asked the obvious next questions:  "Why?  What will the Coca-Cola
corporation do about it?  Why should we trust them?  Have they done
well in the past on equally tricky problems?"

Or suppose that someone says "Mexican-Americans are plotting to
remove all the oxygen in Earth's atmosphere."  You'd probably ask,
"Why would they do *that?*  Don't Mexican-Americans have to breathe
too?  Do Mexican-Americans even function as a unified conspiracy?" 
If you don't ask these obvious next questions when someone says,
"Corporations are plotting to remove Earth's oxygen," then
"Corporations!" functions for you as a semantic stopsign.

Be careful here not to create a new generic counterargument against
things you don't like - "Oh, it's just a stopsign!"  No word is a
stopsign of itself; the question is whether a word has that effect
on a particular person.  Having
[strong emotions](http://lesswrong.com/lw/hp/feeling_rational/) about something doesn't
qualify it as a stopsign.  I'm not exactly fond of terrorists or
fearful of private property; that doesn't mean "Terrorists!" or
"Capitalism!" are cognitive traffic signals unto me.  (The word
"intelligence" did once have that effect on me, though no longer.) 
What distinguishes a semantic stopsign is
*failure to consider the obvious next question.*

*(This post is part of the sequence [Mysterious Answers to Mysterious Questions](http://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Mysterious_Answers_to_Mysterious_Questions).)*

# Mysterious Answers to Mysterious Questions

Imagine looking at your hand, and knowing nothing of cells, nothing
of biochemistry, nothing of DNA. You've learned some anatomy from
dissection, so you know your hand contains muscles; but you don't
know why muscles move instead of lying there like clay. Your hand
is just... stuff... and for some reason it moves under your
direction. Is this not magic?

> "The animal body does not act as a thermodynamic engine ...
> consciousness teaches every individual that they are, to some
> extent, subject to the direction of his will. It appears therefore
> that animated creatures have the power of immediately applying to
> certain moving particles of matter within their bodies, forces by
> which the motions of these particles are directed to produce
> derived mechanical effects... The influence of animal or vegetable
> life on matter is infinitely beyond the range of any scientific
> inquiry hitherto entered on. Its power of directing the motions of
> moving particles, in the demonstrated daily miracle of our human
> free-will, and in the growth of generation after generation of
> plants from a single seed, are infinitely different from any
> possible result of the fortuitous concurrence of atoms... Modern
> biologists were coming once more to the acceptance of something and
> that was a vital principle."  
>         -- Lord Kelvin

This was the theory of *vitalism*; that the mysterious difference
between living matter and non-living matter was explained by an
*elan vital* or *vis vitalis*.  Elan vital infused living matter
and caused it to move as consciously directed. Elan vital
participated in chemical transformations which no mere non-living
particles could undergo - Wรถhler's later synthesis of urea, a
component of urine, was a major blow to the vitalistic theory
because it showed that mere*chemistry* could duplicate a product of
biology.

Calling "elan vital" an explanation, even a
[fake explanation](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/08/fake-explanatio.html)
like
[phlogiston](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/08/fake-causality.html),
is probably giving it too much credit.  It functioned primarily as
a
[curiosity-stopper](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/08/semantic-stopsi.html). 
You said "Why?" and the answer was "Elan vital!"

When you say "Elan vital!", it *feels* like you know why your hand
moves.  You have a little
[causal diagram](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/08/fake-causality.html)
in your head that says ["Elan vital!"] -\> [hand moves].  But
actually you know nothing you didn't know before. You don't know,
say, whether your hand will generate heat or absorb heat, unless
you have observed the fact already; if not, you won't be able to
predict it in advance.  Your curiosity feels sated, but it hasn't
been fed.  Since you can say "Why? Elan vital!" to any possible
observation, it is equally good at explaining all outcomes, a
disguised hypothesis of maximum entropy, etcetera.

But the greater lesson lies in the vitalists' reverence for the
elan vital, their eagerness to pronounce it a mystery beyond all
science. Meeting the great dragon Unknown, the vitalists did not
draw their swords to do battle, but bowed their necks in
submission. They
[took pride](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/03/tsuyoku_naritai.html)
in their ignorance, made biology into a *sacred* mystery, and
thereby became loath to
[relinquish their ignorance](http://yudkowsky.net/virtues/) when
evidence came knocking.

The Secret of Life was *infinitely beyond the reach of science!*
Not just a *little* beyond, mind you, but *infinitely* beyond! Lord
Kelvin sure did get a tremendous emotional kick out of
*not knowing something.*

But ignorance exists in the map, not in the territory.  If I am
ignorant about a phenomenon, that is a fact about my own state of
mind, not a fact about the phenomenon itself. A phenomenon can
*seem* mysterious to some particular person.  There are no
phenomena which are mysterious of themselves. To worship a
phenomenon because it seems so wonderfully mysterious, is to
worship your own ignorance.

Vitalism shared with phlogiston the error of
*encapsulating the mystery as a substance.* Fire was mysterious,
and the phlogiston theory encapsulated the mystery in a mysterious
substance called "phlogiston". Life was a sacred mystery, and
vitalism encapsulated the sacred mystery in a mysterious substance
called "elan vital". Neither answer helped
[concentrate the model's probability density](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/08/focus-your-unce.html)
- make some outcomes easier to explain than others. The
"explanation" just wrapped up the question as a small, hard, opaque
black ball.

In a comedy written by Moliere, a physician explains the power of a
soporific by saying that it contains a "dormitive potency".  Same
principle.  It is a failure of human psychology that, faced with a
mysterious phenomenon, we more readily postulate mysterious
inherent substances than complex underlying processes.

But the deeper failure is supposing that an *answer* can be
mysterious. If a phenomenon feels mysterious, that is a fact about
our state of knowledge, not a fact about the phenomenon itself. The
vitalists saw a mysterious gap in their knowledge, and postulated a
mysterious stuff that plugged the gap. In doing so, they mixed up
the map with the territory. All confusion and bewilderment exist in
the mind, not in encapsulated substances.

This is the ultimate and fully general explanation for why, again
and again in humanity's history, people are shocked to discover
that an incredibly mysterious question has a non-mysterious
answer.  Mystery is a property of questions, not answers.

Therefore I call theories such as vitalism
*mysterious answers to mysterious questions*.

These are the signs of mysterious answers to mysterious questions:

-   First, the explanation acts as a
    [curiosity-stopper](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/08/semantic-stopsi.html)
    rather than an
    [anticipation-controller](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/07/making-beliefs-.html).
-   Second, the hypothesis has no moving parts - the model is not a
    specific complex mechanism, but a blankly solid substance or force.
    The mysterious substance or mysterious force may be said to be here
    or there, to
    [cause](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/08/fake-causality.html)this
    or that; but the reason why the mysterious force behaves thus is
    wrapped in a blank unity.
-   Third, those who proffer the explanation
    [cherish their ignorance](http://yudkowsky.net/virtues/); they
    speak proudly of how the phenomenon defeats ordinary science or is
    unlike merely mundane phenomena.
-   Fourth,
    *even after the answer is given, the phenomenon is still a mystery*and
    possesses the same quality of wonderful inexplicability that it had
    at the start.

# The Futility of Emergence

The failures of [phlogiston](http://lesswrong.com/lw/is/fake_causality/) and
[vitalism](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iu/mysterious_answers_to_mysterious_questions/) are
[historical](http://lesswrong.com/lw/im/hindsight_devalues_science/)
[hindsight](http://lesswrong.com/lw/il/hindsight_bias/). Dare I step out on a limb, and
name some *current* theory which I deem analogously flawed?

I name *emergence*or *emergent phenomena* - usually defined as the
study of systems whose high-level behaviors arise or "emerge" from
the interaction of many low-level elements. 
([Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emergence):  "The way
complex systems and patterns arise out of a multiplicity of
relatively simple interactions".)  Taken literally, that
description fits every phenomenon in our universe above the level
of individual quarks, which is part of the problem.  Imagine
pointing to a market crash and saying "It's not a quark!"  Does
that feel like an explanation?  No?  Then neither should saying
"It's an emergent phenomenon!"

It's the noun "emergence" that I protest, rather than the verb
"emerges from".  There's nothing wrong with saying "X emerges from
Y", where Y is some specific, detailed model with internal moving
parts.  "Arises from" is another legitimate phrase that means
exactly the same thing:  Gravity arises from the curvature of
spacetime, according to the specific mathematical model of General
Relativity. Chemistry arises from interactions between atoms,
according to the specific model of quantum electrodynamics.

Now suppose I should say that gravity is explained by "arisence" or
that chemistry is an "arising phenomenon", and claim that as my
explanation.



The phrase "emerges from" is acceptable, just like "arises from" or
"is caused by" are acceptable, if the phrase precedes some specific
model to be judged on its own merits.

However, this is *not* the way "emergence" is commonly used.
"Emergence" is commonly used as an explanation in its own right.

I have lost track of how many times I have heard people say,
"Intelligence is an emergent phenomenon!" as if that explained
intelligence. This usage fits all the checklist items for a
[mysterious answer to a mysterious question](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iu/mysterious_answers_to_mysterious_questions/).
What do you know, after you have said that intelligence is
"emergent"?  You can make no new predictions.  You do not know
anything about the behavior of real-world minds that you did not
know before.  It feels like you believe a new fact, but you don't
anticipate any different outcomes. Your curiosity feels sated, but
it has not been fed.  The hypothesis has no moving parts - there's
no detailed internal model to manipulate.  Those who proffer the
hypothesis of "emergence" confess their ignorance of the internals,
and take pride in it; they contrast the science of "emergence" to
other sciences merely mundane.

And even after the answer of "Why? Emergence!" is given,
*the phenomenon is still a mystery* and possesses the same sacred
impenetrability it had at the start.

A fun exercise is to eliminate the adjective "emergent" from any
sentence in which it appears, and see if the sentence says anything
different:

-   *Before:*  Human intelligence is an emergent product of neurons
    firing.
-   *After:*  Human intelligence is a product of neurons firing.

-   *Before:*  The behavior of the ant colony is the emergent
    outcome of the interactions of many individual ants.
-   *After:*  The behavior of the ant colony is the outcome of the
    interactions of many individual ants.
-   *Even better:* A colony is made of ants. We can successfully
    predict some aspects of colony behavior using models that include
    only individual ants, without any global colony variables, showing
    that we understand how those colony behaviors arise from ant
    behaviors.

Another fun exercise is to replace the word "emergent" with the old
[word](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iq/guessing_the_teachers_password/), the
[explanation](http://lesswrong.com/lw/ip/fake_explanations/) that people had to use
before emergence was invented:

-   *Before:*  Life is an emergent phenomenon.
-   *After:*  Life is a magical phenomenon.

-   *Before:*  Human intelligence is an emergent product of neurons
    firing.
-   *After:*  Human intelligence is a magical product of neurons
    firing.

Does not each statement convey exactly the same amount of knowledge
about the phenomenon's behavior? Does not each hypothesis
[fit exactly the same set of outcomes](http://lesswrong.com/lw/if/your_strength_as_a_rationalist/)?

"Emergence" has become very popular, just as saying "magic" used to
be very popular. "Emergence" has the same deep appeal to human
psychology, for the same reason. "Emergence" is such a wonderfully
easy explanation, and it feels good to say it; it gives you a
[sacred mystery](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iu/mysterious_answers_to_mysterious_questions/)
to worship. Emergence is popular *because* it is the junk food of
curiosity. You can explain anything using emergence, and so people
do just that; for it feels so wonderful to explain things. Humans
are still humans, even if they've taken a few science classes in
college. Once they find a way to escape the
[shackles](http://yudkowsky.net/virtues/) of settled science, they
get up to the same shenanigans as their ancestors,
[dressed up in the literary genre of "science"](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i7/belief_as_attire/)
but still the same species psychology.

# Say Not "Complexity"

Once upon a time...

This is a story from when I first met Marcello, with whom I would
later work for a year on AI theory; but at this point I had not yet
accepted him as my apprentice.  I knew that he competed at the
national level in mathematical and computing olympiads, which
sufficed to attract my attention for a closer look; but I didn't
know yet if he could learn to think about AI.

I had asked Marcello to say how he thought an AI might discover how
to solve a Rubik's Cube.  Not in a preprogrammed way, which is
trivial, but rather how the AI itself might figure out the laws of
the Rubik universe and reason out how to exploit them.  How would
an AI *invent for itself* the concept of an "operator", or "macro",
which is the key to solving the Rubik's Cube?

At some point in this discussion, Marcello said:  "Well, I think
the AI needs complexity to do X, and complexity to do Y -"

And I said, "Don't say '*complexity'.*"

Marcello said, "Why not?"



I said, "Complexity should never be a goal in itself.  You may need
to use a particular algorithm that adds some amount of complexity,
but complexity for the sake of complexity just makes things
harder."  (I was thinking of all the people whom I had heard
advocating that the Internet would "wake up" and become an AI when
it became "sufficiently complex".)

And Marcello said, "But there's got to be *some* amount of
complexity that does it."

I closed my eyes briefly, and tried to think of how to explain it
all in words.  To me, saying 'complexity' simply *felt* like the
wrong move in the AI dance.  No one can think fast enough to
deliberate, in words, about each sentence of their stream of
consciousness; for that would require an infinite recursion.  We
think in words, but our stream of consciousness is steered below
the level of words, by the trained-in remnants of past insights and
harsh experience...

I said, "Did you read
[A Technical Explanation of Technical Explanation](http://yudkowsky.net/bayes/technical.html)?"

"Yes," said Marcello.

"Okay," I said, "saying 'complexity' doesn't concentrate your
probability mass."

"Oh," Marcello said, "like
'[emergence](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iv/the_futility_of_emergence/)'.  Huh.  So... now
I've got to think about how X might actually happen..."

That was when I thought to myself,
"*Maybe **this** one is teachable.*"

Complexity is not a useless concept.  It has mathematical
definitions attached to it, such as Kolmogorov complexity, and
Vapnik-Chervonenkis complexity.  Even on an intuitive level,
complexity is often worth thinking about - you have to judge the
complexity of a hypothesis and decide if it's "too complicated"
given the supporting evidence, or look at a design and try to make
it simpler.

But concepts are not useful or useless of themselves.  Only
*usages* are correct or incorrect.  In the step Marcello was trying
to take in the dance, he was trying to explain something for free,
get something for nothing.  It is an extremely common misstep, at
least in my field.  You can join a discussion on Artificial General
Intelligence and watch people doing the same thing, left and right,
over and over again - constantly skipping over things they don't
understand, without realizing that's what they're doing.

In an eyeblink it happens: putting a
[non-controlling causal node](http://lesswrong.com/lw/is/fake_causality/) behind
something mysterious, a causal node that
[feels like an explanation](http://lesswrong.com/lw/ip/fake_explanations/) but isn't. 
The mistake takes place below the level of words.  It requires no
special character flaw; it is how human beings think
[by default](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iq/guessing_the_teachers_password/), since the
ancient times.

What you must avoid is *skipping over the mysterious part;* you
must linger at the mystery to confront it directly. There are many
words that can skip over mysteries, and some of them would be
legitimate in other contexts - "complexity", for example.  But the
essential mistake is that *skip-over,* regardless of what causal
node goes behind it.  The skip-over is not a thought, but a
microthought.  You have to pay close attention to catch yourself at
it.  And when you train yourself to avoid skipping, it will become
a matter of instinct, not verbal reasoning.  You have to *feel*
which parts of your map are still blank, and more importantly, pay
attention to that feeling.

I suspect that in academia there is a huge pressure to sweep
problems under the rug so that you can present a paper with the
appearance of completeness.  You'll get more kudos for a seemingly
complete model that includes some
"[emergent phenomena](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iv/the_futility_of_emergence/)", versus
an explicitly incomplete map where the label says "I got no clue
how this part works" or "then a miracle occurs".  A journal may not
even accept the latter paper, since who knows but that the unknown
steps are really where everything interesting happens?  And yes, it
sometimes happens that all the non-magical parts of your map turn
out to also be non-important.  That's the price you sometimes pay,
for entering into terra incognita and trying to solve problems
*incrementally.*  But that makes it even *more* important to *know*
when you aren't finished yet.  Mostly, people don't dare to enter
terra incognita at all, for the deadly fear of wasting their
time.* *

And if you're working on a revolutionary AI startup, there is an
even huger pressure to sweep problems under the rug; or you will
have to [admit to yourself](http://lesswrong.com/lw/id/you_can_face_reality/) that you
don't know how to build an AI yet, and your current life-plans will
come crashing down in ruins around your ears.  But perhaps I am
[over-explaining](http://lesswrong.com/lw/hz/correspondence_bias/), since skip-over
happens [by default](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iq/guessing_the_teachers_password/) in
humans; if you're looking for examples, just watch people
discussing religion or philosophy or spirituality or any science in
which they were not professionally trained.

Marcello and I developed a convention in our AI work: when we ran
into something we didn't understand, which was often, we would say
"magic" - as in, "X magically does Y" - to remind ourselves that
*here was an unsolved problem, a gap in our understanding.*  It is
far better to say "magic", than "complexity" or "emergence"; the
latter [words](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iq/guessing_the_teachers_password/) create an
illusion of understanding.  Wiser to say "magic", and leave
yourself a placeholder, a reminder of work you will have to do
later.

# Positive Bias: Look Into the Dark

I am teaching a class, and I write upon the blackboard three
numbers:  2-4-6.  "I am thinking of a rule," I say, "which governs
sequences of three numbers.  The sequence 2-4-6, as it so happens,
obeys this rule.  Each of you will find, on your desk, a pile of
index cards.  Write down a sequence of three numbers on a card, and
I'll mark it "Yes" for fits the rule, or "No" for not fitting the
rule.  Then you can write down another set of three numbers and ask
whether it fits again, and so on.  When you're confident that you
know the rule, write down the rule on a card.  You can test as many
triplets as you like."

Here's the record of one student's guesses:

    4, 6, 2            No  
    4, 6, 8            Yes  
    10, 12, 14         Yes

At this point the student wrote down his guess at the rule.  What
do *you* think the rule is?  Would you have wanted to test another
triplet, and if so, what would it be?  Take a moment to think
before continuing.

The challenge above is based on a classic experiment due to Peter
Wason, the 2-4-6 task.  Although subjects given this task typically
expressed high confidence in their guesses, only 21% of the
subjects successfully guessed the experimenter's real rule, and
replications since then have continued to show success rates of
around 20%.

The study was called "On the failure to eliminate hypotheses in a
conceptual task" (*Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,*
12: 129-140, 1960).  Subjects who attempt the 2-4-6 task usually
try to generate *positive* examples, rather than *negative*
examples - they apply the hypothetical rule to generate a
representative instance, and see if it is labeled "Yes".

Thus, someone who forms the hypothesis "numbers increasing by two"
will test the triplet 8-10-12, hear that it fits, and confidently
announce the rule.  Someone who forms the hypothesis X-2X-3X will
test the triplet 3-6-9, discover that it fits, and then announce
that rule.

In every case the actual rule is the same: the three numbers must
be in ascending order.

But to discover this, you would have to generate triplets that
*shouldn't* fit, such as 20-23-26, and see if they are labeled
"No".  Which people tend not to do, in this experiment.  In some
cases, subjects devise, "test", and announce rules far more
complicated than the actual answer.

This cognitive phenomenon is usually lumped in with "confirmation
bias".  However, it seems to me that the phenomenon of trying to
test *positive* rather than *negative* examples, ought to be
distinguished from the phenomenon of trying to preserve the belief
you started with.  "Positive bias" is sometimes used as a synonym
for "confirmation bias", and fits this particular flaw much
better.

It once seemed that [phlogiston theory](http://lesswrong.com/lw/is/fake_causality/)
could explain a flame going out in an enclosed box (the air became
saturated with phlogiston and no more could be released), but
phlogiston theory could just as well have explained the flame *not*
going out.  To notice this, you have to search for negative
examples instead of positive examples, look into zero instead of
one; which goes against the grain of what experiment has shown to
be human instinct.

For by instinct, we human beings only live in half the world.

One may be lectured on positive bias for days, and yet overlook it
in-the-moment.  Positive bias is not something we do as a matter of
logic, or even as a matter of emotional attachment.  The 2-4-6 task
is "cold", logical, not affectively "hot".  And yet the mistake is
sub-verbal, on the level of imagery, of instinctive reactions. 
Because the problem doesn't arise from following a deliberate rule
that says "Only think about positive examples", it can't be solved
just by knowing verbally that "We ought to think about both
positive and negative examples."  Which example automatically pops
into your head?  You have to learn, wordlessly, to zag instead of
zig.  You have to learn to flinch toward the zero, instead of away
from it.

I have been writing for quite some time now on the notion that
[the strength of a hypothesis is what it *can't* explain, not what it *can*](http://lesswrong.com/lw/if/your_strength_as_a_rationalist/)
- if you are equally good at explaining any outcome, you have zero
knowledge.  So to spot an explanation that isn't helpful, it's not
enough to think of what it does explain very well - you also have
to search for results it *couldn't* explain, and this is the true
strength of the theory.

So I said all this, and then yesterday,
[I challenged the usefulness of "emergence" as a concept](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iv/the_futility_of_emergence/). 
One commenter cited superconductivity and ferromagnetism as
examples of emergence.  I replied that non-superconductivity and
non-ferromagnetism were also examples of emergence, which was the
problem.  But be it far from me to criticize the commenter! 
Despite having read extensively on "confirmation bias", I didn't
spot the "gotcha" in the 2-4-6 task the first time I read about
it.  It's a subverbal blink-reaction that has to be retrained.  I'm
still working on it myself.

So much of a rationalist's skill is below the level of words.  It
makes for challenging work in trying to convey the Art through blog
posts.  People will agree with you, but then, in the next sentence,
do something subdeliberative that goes in the opposite direction. 
Not that I'm complaining!  A major reason I'm posting here is to
observe what my words *haven't* conveyed.

Are you searching for positive examples of positive bias right now,
or sparing a fraction of your search on what positive bias should
lead you to *not* see?  Did you look toward light or darkness?

# My Wild and Reckless Youth

It is said that parents do all the things they tell their children
not to do, which is how they know not to do them.

Long ago, in the unthinkably distant past, I was a devoted
Traditional Rationalist, conceiving myself skilled according to
that kind, yet I knew not the Way of Bayes.  When the young Eliezer
was confronted with a mysterious-seeming question, the precepts of
Traditional Rationality did not stop him from devising a
[Mysterious Answer](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iu/mysterious_answers_to_mysterious_questions/). 
It is, by far, the most embarrassing mistake I made in my life, and
I still wince to think of it.

What was my mysterious answer to a mysterious question?  This I
will not describe, for it would be a long tale and complicated.  I
was young, and a mere Traditional Rationalist who knew not the
teachings of Tversky and Kahneman.  I knew about Occam's Razor, but
not the
[conjunction fallacy](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conjunction_fallacy). 
I thought I could get away with thinking complicated thoughts
myself, in the literary style of the complicated thoughts I read in
science books, not realizing that correct complexity is only
possible when every step is pinned down overwhelmingly.  Today, one
of the chief pieces of advice I give to aspiring young rationalists
is "Do not attempt long chains of reasoning or complicated plans."

Nothing more than this need be said:  Even after I invented my
"answer", the phenomenon was
[still a mystery](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iu/mysterious_answers_to_mysterious_questions/)
unto me, and possessed the same quality of wondrous impenetrability
that it had at the start.

Make no [mistake](http://lesswrong.com/lw/hz/correspondence_bias/), that younger
Eliezer was not stupid.  All the errors of which the young Eliezer
was guilty, are still being made today by respected scientists in
respected journals.  It would have taken a subtler skill to protect
him, than ever he was taught as a Traditional Rationalist.

Indeed, the young Eliezer diligently and painstakingly followed the
injunctions of Traditional Rationality in the course of going
astray.

As a Traditional Rationalist, the young Eliezer was careful to
ensure that his Mysterious Answer made a bold prediction of future
experience.  Namely, I expected future neurologists to discover
that neurons were exploiting quantum gravity, a la Sir Roger
Penrose.  This required neurons to maintain a certain degree of
quantum coherence, which was something you could look for, and find
or not find.  Either you observe that or you don't, right?

But my hypothesis made no *retrospective* predictions.  According
to Traditional Science, retrospective predictions don't count - so
why bother making them?  To a Bayesian, on the other hand, if a
hypothesis does not *today* have a favorable likelihood ratio over
"I don't know", it raises the question of why you *today* believe
anything more complicated than "I don't know".  But I knew not the
Way of Bayes, so I was not thinking about likelihood ratios or
focusing probability density.  I had Made a Falsifiable Prediction;
was this not the Law?

As a Traditional Rationalist, the young Eliezer was careful not to
believe in magic, mysticism, carbon chauvinism, or anything of that
sort.  I proudly [professed](http://lesswrong.com/lw/i6/professing_and_cheering/) of my
Mysterious Answer, "It is just physics like all the rest of
physics!"  As if you could save magic from being a cognitive
isomorph of magic, by [calling](http://lesswrong.com/lw/ir/science_as_attire/) it
quantum gravity.  But I knew not the Way of Bayes, and did not see
the [level](http://lesswrong.com/lw/ip/fake_explanations/) on which my idea was
isomorphic to magic.  I gave my *allegiance* to physics, but this
did not save me; what does probability theory know of allegiances? 
I avoided everything that Traditional Rationality told me was
forbidden, but what was left was still magic.

Beyond a doubt, my allegiance to Traditional Rationality helped me
get out of the hole I dug myself into.  If I hadn't been a
Traditional Rationalist, I would have been *completely* screwed. 
But Traditional Rationality still wasn't enough to get it *right.* 
It just led me into different mistakes than the ones it had
explicitly forbidden.

When I think about how my younger self very carefully followed the
rules of Traditional Rationality in the course of getting the
answer *wrong,* it sheds light on the question of why people who
call themselves "rationalists"
[do not rule the world](http://lesswrong.com/lw/he/knowing_about_biases_can_hurt_people/). 
You need *one whole hell of a lot* of rationality before it does
anything but lead you into new and interesting mistakes.* *

Traditional Rationality is taught as an art, rather than a science;
you read the biography of famous physicists describing the lessons
life taught them, and you try to do what they tell you to do.  But
you haven't lived their lives, and half of what they're trying to
describe is an instinct that has been trained into them.

The way Traditional Rationality is designed, it would have been
acceptable for me to spend 30 years on my silly idea, so long as I
succeeded in falsifying it eventually, and was honest with myself
about what my theory predicted, and accepted the disproof when it
arrived, et cetera.  This is enough to let the Ratchet of Science
click forward, but it's a little harsh on the people who waste 30
years of their lives.  Traditional Rationality is a walk, not a
dance.  It's designed to get you to the truth *eventually*, and
gives you all too much time to smell the flowers along the way.

Traditional Rationalists can agree to disagree.  Traditional
Rationality doesn't have the *ideal* that thinking is an exact art
in which there is only one correct probability estimate given the
evidence.  In Traditional Rationality, you're allowed to guess, and
then test your guess.  But experience has taught me that if you
don't *know,* and you guess, you'll end up being wrong.

The Way of Bayes is also an imprecise art, at least the way I'm
holding forth upon it.  These blog posts are still fumbling
attempts to put into words lessons that would be better taught by
experience.  But at least there's *underlying* math, plus
experimental evidence from cognitive psychology on how humans
actually think.  Maybe that will be enough to cross the
stratospherically high threshold required for a discipline that
lets you actually get it right, instead of just constraining you
into interesting new mistakes.

# Failing to Learn from History

Once upon a time, in
[my wild and reckless youth](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iy/my_wild_and_reckless_youth/),
when I knew not the Way of Bayes, I gave a
[Mysterious Answer](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iu/mysterious_answers_to_mysterious_questions/)
to a mysterious-seeming question.  Many failures occurred in
sequence, but one mistake stands out as most critical:  My younger
self did not realize that
*solving a mystery should make it feel less confusing.*  I was
trying to explain a Mysterious Phenomenon - which to me meant
providing a cause for it, fitting it into an integrated model of
reality.  Why should this make the phenomenon less Mysterious, when
that is its nature?  I was trying to *explain* the Mysterious
Phenomenon, not render it (by some impossible alchemy) into a
mundane phenomenon, a phenomenon that wouldn't even call out for an
unusual explanation in the first place.  
As a Traditional Rationalist, I knew the historical tales of
astrologers and astronomy, of alchemists and chemistry, of
vitalists and biology.  But the Mysterious Phenomenon was not like
this.  It was something *new,*something stranger, something more
difficult, something that ordinary science had failed to explain
for centuries -

- as if stars and matter and life had not been mysteries for
hundreds of years and thousands of years, from the dawn of human
thought right up until science finally solved them -

We learn about astronomy and chemistry and biology in school, and
it seems to us that these matters have *always been* the proper
realm of science, that they have *never been* mysterious.  When
science dares to challenge a new Great Puzzle, the children of that
generation are skeptical, for they have never seen science explain
something that *feels* mysterious to them.  Science is only good
for explaining *scientific* subjects, like stars and matter and
life.

I thought the lesson of history was that astrologers and alchemists
and vitalists had an
[innate character flaw](http://lesswrong.com/lw/hz/correspondence_bias/), a tendency
toward mysterianism, which led them to come up with mysterious
explanations for non-mysterious subjects.  But surely, if a
phenomenon really *was* very weird, a weird explanation might be in
order?

It was only afterward, when I began to see the mundane structure
inside the mystery, that I realized whose shoes I was standing in. 
Only then did I realize how reasonable vitalism had
seemed*at the time*, how *surprising* and *embarrassing* had been
the universe's reply of, "Life is mundane, and does not need a
weird explanation."

We read history but we don't *live* it, we don't *experience* it. 
If only I had *personally* postulated astrological mysteries and
then discovered Newtonian mechanics, postulated alchemical
mysteries and then discovered chemistry, postulated vitalistic
mysteries and then discovered biology.  I would have thought of my
Mysterious Answer and said to myself: 
*No way am I falling for that again.*

# Making History Available

There is a habit of thought which I call
the*logical fallacy of generalization from fictional evidence,*
which deserves a blog post in its own right, one of these days. 
Journalists who, for example, talk about the *Terminator* movies in
a report on AI, do not usually treat *Terminator* as a prophecy or
fixed truth.  But the movie is recalled - is
[available](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Availability_heuristic) -
as if it were an illustrative historical case.  As if the
journalist had seen it happen on some other planet, so that it
might well happen here.  More on this in Section 6 of
[this paper](http://singinst.org/Biases.pdf).

There is an inverse error to generalizing from fictional evidence:
failing to be sufficiently moved by *historical* evidence.  The
trouble with generalizing from fictional evidence is that it is
fiction - it never actually happened.  It's not drawn from the same
distribution as this, our real universe;
[fiction differs from reality in systematic ways](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/07/tell-your-anti-.html). 
But history *has* happened, and *should* be available.

In our ancestral environment, there were no movies; what you saw
with your own eyes was true.  Is it any wonder that fictions we see
in lifelike moving pictures have too great an impact on us? 
Conversely, things that *really happened,* we encounter as ink on
paper; they happened, but we never *saw* them happen.  We don't
remember them happening to us.

The inverse error is to treat history as mere story, process it
with the same part of your mind that handles the novels you read. 
You may say with your lips that it is "truth", rather than
"fiction", but that doesn't mean you are being moved as much as you
should be.  Many biases involve being insufficiently moved by
[dry, abstract information](http://lesswrong.com/lw/hw/scope_insensitivity/).

Once upon a time, I gave a
[Mysterious Answer](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iu/mysterious_answers_to_mysterious_questions/)
to a mysterious question, not realizing that I was making exactly
the same mistake as astrologers devising mystical explanations for
the stars, or alchemists devising magical properties of matter, or
vitalists postulating an opaque "elan vital" to explain all of
biology.

When
[I finally realized whose shoes I was standing in](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iz/failing_to_learn_from_history/),
there was a sudden shock of unexpected connection with the past.  I
realized that the invention and destruction of vitalism - which I
had only read about in books - had
*actually happened to real people,* who experienced it much the
same way I experienced the invention and destruction of my own
mysterious answer.  And I also realized that if I had actually
*experienced* the past - if I had lived through past scientific
revolutions myself, rather than reading about them in history books
- I probably would *not* have made the same mistake again.  I would
not have come up with *another* mysterious answer; the first
thousand lessons would have hammered home the moral.

So (I thought), to feel sufficiently the force of history, I should
try to approximate the thoughts of an Eliezer who *had* lived
through history - I should try to think as if everything I read
about in history books, had actually happened to me.  (With
appropriate reweighting for the availability bias of history books
- I should remember being a thousand peasants for every ruler.)  I
should immerse myself in history, imagine *living* through eras I
only saw as ink on paper.

Why should I remember the Wright Brothers' first flight?  I was not
there.  But as a rationalist, could I dare to *not* remember, when
the event actually happened?  Is there so much difference between
seeing an event through your eyes - which is actually a causal
chain involving reflected photons, not a direct connection - and
seeing an event through a history book?  Photons and history books
both descend by causal chains from the event itself.

I had to overcome the false amnesia of being born at a particular
time.  I had to recall - make
[available](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Availability_heuristic) -
*all* the memories, not just the memories which, by mere
coincidence, belonged to myself and my own era.

The Earth became older, of a sudden.

To my former memory, the United States had always existed - there
was never a time when there was no United States.  I had not
remembered, until that time, how the Roman Empire rose, and brought
peace and order, and lasted through so many centuries, until I
forgot that things had ever been otherwise; and yet the Empire
fell, and barbarians overran my city, and the learning that I had
possessed was lost.  The modern world became more fragile to my
eyes; it was not the first modern world.

So many mistakes, made over and over and *over* again, because I
did not remember making them, in every era I never lived...

And to think, people sometimes wonder if overcoming bias is
important.

Don't you remember how many times your biases have killed you?  You
don't?  I've noticed that sudden amnesia often follows a fatal
mistake.  But take it from me, it happened.  I remember; I wasn't
there.

So the next time you doubt the strangeness of the future, remember
how you were born in a hunter-gatherer tribe ten thousand years
ago, when no one knew of Science at all.  Remember how you were
shocked, to the depths of your being, when Science explained the
great and terrible sacred mysteries that you once revered so
highly.  Remember how you once believed that you could fly by
eating the right mushrooms, and then you accepted with
disappointment that you would never fly, and then you flew. 
Remember how you had always thought that slavery was right and
proper, and then you changed your mind. 
[Don't imagine how you *could* have predicted the change](http://lesswrong.com/lw/il/hindsight_bias/),
for that is amnesia.  *Remember* that, in fact, you did not guess. 
Remember how, century after century, the world changed in ways you
did not guess.

Maybe then you will be less shocked by what happens next.

# Explain/Worship/Ignore?

As our tribe wanders through the grasslands, searching for fruit
trees and prey, it happens every now and then that water pours down
from the sky.

"Why does water sometimes fall from the sky?" I ask the bearded
wise man of our tribe.

He thinks for a moment, this question having never occurred to him
before, and then says, "From time to time, the sky spirits battle,
and when they do, their blood drips from the sky."

"Where do the sky spirits come from?" I ask.

His voice drops to a whisper.  "From the before time.  From the
long long ago."

When it rains, and you don't know why, you have several options. 
First, you could simply not ask why - not follow up on the
question, or never think of the question in the first place.  This
is the Ignore command, which the bearded wise man originally
selected.  Second, you could try to devise some sort of
explanation, the Explain command, as the bearded man did in
response to your first question.  Third, you could enjoy the
sensation of mysteriousness - the Worship command.

Now, as you are bound to notice from this story, each time you
select Explain, the best-case scenario is that you get an
explanation, such as "sky spirits".  But then this explanation
itself is subject to the same dilemma - Explain, Worship, or
Ignore?  Each time you hit Explain, science grinds for a while,
returns an explanation, and then another dialog box pops up.  As
good rationalists, we feel duty-bound to keep hitting Explain, but
it seems like a road that has no end.

You hit Explain for life, and get chemistry; you hit Explain for
chemistry, and get atoms; you hit Explain for atoms, and get
electrons and nuclei; you hit Explain for nuclei, and get quantum
chromodynamics and quarks; you hit Explain for how the quarks got
there, and get back the Big Bang...

We can hit Explain for the Big Bang, and wait while science grinds
through its process, and maybe someday it will return a perfectly
good explanation.  But then that will just bring up another dialog
box.  So, if we continue long enough, we must come to a *special*
dialog box, a *new* option, an Explanation That Needs No
Explanation, a place where the chain ends - and this, maybe, is the
only explanation worth knowing.

There - I just hit Worship.

Never forget that there are many more ways to worship something
than lighting candles around an altar.

If I'd said, "Huh, that does seem paradoxical.  I wonder how the
apparent paradox is resolved?" then I would have hit Explain, which
does sometimes take a while to produce an answer.

And if the whole issue seems to you unimportant, or irrelevant, or
if you'd rather put off thinking about it until tomorrow, than you
have hit Ignore.

Select your option wisely.

# "Science" as Curiosity-Stopper

Imagine that I, in full view of live television cameras, raised my
hands and chanted *abracadabra* and caused a brilliant light to be
born, flaring in empty space beyond my outstretched hands.  Imagine
that I committed this act of blatant, unmistakeable sorcery under
the full supervision of James Randi and all skeptical armies. Most
people, I think, would be *fairly curious* as to what was going
on.

But now suppose instead that I don't go on television.  I do not
wish to share the power, nor the truth behind it. I want to keep my
sorcery secret.  And yet I also want to cast my spells whenever and
wherever I please. I want to cast my brilliant flare of light so
that I can read a book on the train - without anyone becoming
curious.  Is there a spell that stops curiosity?

Yes indeed!  Whenever anyone asks "How did you do that?", I just
say "Science!"

It's [not a real explanation](http://lesswrong.com/lw/ip/fake_explanations/), so much
as a [curiosity-stopper](http://lesswrong.com/lw/it/semantic_stopsigns/). It doesn't
tell you whether the light will brighten or fade, change color in
hue or saturation, and it certainly doesn't tell you how to make a
similar light yourself. You don't actually *know* anything more
than you knew before I said the
[magic word](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iq/guessing_the_teachers_password/). But you turn
away, satisfied that nothing unusual is going on.

Better yet, the same trick works with a standard light switch.

Flip a switch and a light bulb turns on.  Why?

In school, one is taught that the
[password](http://lesswrong.com/lw/iq/guessing_the_teachers_password/) to the light
bulb is "Electricity!"  By now, I hope, you're wary of marking the
light bulb "understood" on such a basis.  Does saying
"Electricity!" let you do calculations that will control your
anticipation of experience?  There is, at the least, a great deal
more to learn.  (Physicists should ignore this paragraph and
substitute a problem in
[evolutionary theory](http://lesswrong.com/lw/kr/an_alien_god/), where the substance of
the theory is again in calculations that few people know how to
perform.)

If you thought the light bulb was *scientifically inexplicable,* it
would seize the *entirety* of your attention.  You would drop
whatever else you were doing, and focus on that light bulb.

But what does the phrase "scientifically explicable" mean?  It
means that someone *else* knows how the light bulb works.  When you
are told the light bulb is "scientifically explicable", you don't
know more than you knew earlier; you don't know whether the light
bulb will brighten or fade.  But because someone *else* knows, it
devalues the knowledge in your eyes.  You become less curious.

Since this is an econblog, someone out there is bound to say, "If
the light bulb were unknown to science, you could gain fame and
fortune by investigating it."  But I'm not talking about greed. 
I'm not talking about career ambition.  I'm talking about the raw
emotion of curiosity - the feeling of being intrigued.  Why should
*your* curiosity be diminished because someone *else,* not you,
knows how the light bulb works?  Is this not spite?  It's not
enough for *you* to know; other people must also be ignorant, or
you won't be happy?

There are goods that knowledge may serve besides curiosity, such as
the social utility of technology.  For these instrumental goods, it
matters whether some other entity in local space already knows. 
But for my own curiosity, why should it matter? 

Besides, consider the consequences if you permit "Someone else
knows the answer" to function as a curiosity-stopper.  One day you
walk into your living room and see a giant green elephant,
seemingly hovering in midair, surrounded by an aura of silver
light.

"What the heck?" you say.

And a voice comes from above the elephant, saying, "SOMEONE ELSE
ALREADY KNOWS WHY THIS ELEPHANT IS HERE."

"Oh," you say, "in that case, never mind," and walk on to the
kitchen.

I don't know the grand unified theory for this universe's laws of
physics.  I also don't know much about human anatomy with the
exception of the brain.  I couldn't point out on my body where my
kidneys are, and I can't recall offhand what my liver does.  (I am
not proud of this.  Alas, with all the math I need to study, I'm
not likely to learn anatomy anytime soon.)

Should I, so far as *curiosity* is concerned, be more intrigued by
my ignorance of the ultimate laws of physics, than the fact that I
don't know much about what goes on inside my own body?

If I raised my hands and cast a light spell, you would be
intrigued.  Should you be any *less* intrigued by the very fact
that I raised my hands?  When you raise your arm and wave a hand
around, this act of will is coordinated by (among other brain
areas) your cerebellum.  I bet you don't know how the cerebellum
works.  *I* know a little - though only the gross details, not
enough to perform calculations... but so what?  What does that
matter, if *you* don't know?  Why should there be a double standard
of curiosity for sorcery and hand motions?

Look at yourself in the mirror.  Do you know what you're looking
at?  Do you know what looks out from behind your eyes?  Do you know
what you are?  Some of that answer, Science knows, and some of it
Science does not.  But why should that distinction matter to your
curiosity, if *you* don't know?

Do you know how your knees work?  Do you know how your shoes were
made?  Do you know why your computer monitor glows?  Do you know
why water is wet?

The world around you is full of puzzles.  Prioritize, if you must. 
But do not complain that cruel Science has emptied the world of
mystery.  With reasoning such as that, I could get you to overlook
an elephant in your living room.

# Applause Lights

At the Singularity Summit 2007, one of the speakers called for
democratic, multinational development of AI.  So I stepped up to
the microphone and asked:

> Suppose that a group of democratic republics form a consortium to
> develop AI, and there's a lot of politicking during the process -
> some interest groups have unusually large influence, others get
> shafted - in other words, the result looks just like the products
> of modern democracies.  Alternatively, suppose a group of rebel
> nerds develops an AI in their basement, and instructs the AI to
> poll everyone in the world - dropping cellphones to anyone who
> doesn't have them - and do whatever the majority says.  Which of
> these do you think is more "democratic", and would you feel safe
> with either?

I wanted to find out whether he believed in the pragmatic adequacy
of the democratic political process, or if he believed in the moral
rightness of voting.  But the speaker replied:

> The first scenario sounds like an editorial in Reason magazine, and
> the second sounds like a Hollywood movie plot.

Confused, I asked:

> Then what kind of democratic process *did* you have in mind?

The speaker replied:

> Something like the Human Genome Project - that was an
> internationally sponsored research project.

I asked:

> How would different interest groups resolve their conflicts in a
> structure like the Human Genome Project?

And the speaker said:

> I don't know.

This exchange puts me in mind of a
[quote](http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,954853,00.html)
(
which I failed to Google
found by Jeff Grey and Miguel) from some dictator or other, who was
asked if he had any intentions to move his pet state toward
democracy:
> We believe we are already within a democratic system.  Some factors
> are still missing, like the expression of the people's will.

The substance of a democracy is the specific mechanism that
resolves policy conflicts.  If all groups had the same preferred
policies, there would be no need for democracy - we would
automatically cooperate.  The resolution process can be a direct
majority vote, or an elected legislature, or even a voter-sensitive
behavior of an AI, but it has to be *something. *What does it
*mean* to call for a "democratic" solution if you don't have a
conflict-resolution mechanism in mind?

I think it means that you have said the word "democracy", so the
audience is supposed to cheer.  It's not so much a
propositional* *statement, as the equivalent of the "Applause"
light that tells a studio audience when to clap.

This case is remarkable only in that I mistook the applause light
for a policy suggestion, with subsequent embarrassment for all. 
Most applause lights are much more blatant, and can be detected by
a simple reversal test.  For example, suppose someone says:

> We need to balance the risks and opportunities of AI.

If you reverse this statement, you get:

> We shouldn't balance the risks and opportunities of AI.

Since the reversal sounds *ab*normal, the unreversed statement is
probably normal, implying it does not convey new information. 
There are plenty of legitimate reasons for uttering a sentence that
would be uninformative in isolation.  "We need to balance the risks
and opportunities of AI" can introduce a discussion topic; it can
emphasize the importance of a specific proposal for balancing; it
can criticize an unbalanced proposal.  Linking to a normal
assertion can convey new information to a bounded rationalist - the
link itself may not be obvious.  But if *no* specifics follow, the
sentence is probably an applause light.

I am tempted to give a talk sometime that consists of *nothing but*
applause lights, and see how long it takes for the audience to
start laughing:

> I am here to propose to you today that we need to balance the risks
> and opportunities of advanced Artificial Intelligence.  We should
> avoid the risks and, insofar as it is possible, realize the
> opportunities.  We should not needlessly confront entirely
> unnecessary dangers.  To achieve these goals, we must plan wisely
> and rationally.  We should not act in fear and panic, or give in to
> technophobia; but neither should we act in blind enthusiasm.  We
> should respect the interests of all parties with a stake in the
> Singularity.  We must try to ensure that the benefits of advanced
> technologies accrue to as many individuals as possible, rather than
> being restricted to a few.  We must try to avoid, as much as
> possible, violent conflicts using these technologies; and we must
> prevent massive destructive capability from falling into the hands
> of individuals.  We should think through these issues before, not
> after, it is too late to do anything about them...

# Chaotic Inversion

I was recently having a conversation with some friends on the topic
of hour-by-hour productivity and willpower maintenance - something
I've struggled with my whole life.

I can
[avoid running away from a hard problem the first time I see it](http://lesswrong.com/lw/un/on_doing_the_impossible/)
(perseverance on a timescale of seconds), and I can stick to the
same problem for years; but to keep working on a timescale of
*hours* is a constant battle for me.  It goes without saying that
I've already read reams and reams of advice; and the most help I
got from it was realizing that a sizable fraction other creative
professionals had the same problem, and couldn't beat it either, no
matter how reasonable* *all the advice sounds.

"What do you do when you can't work?" my friends asked me. 
(Conversation probably not accurate, this is a very loose gist.)

And I replied that I usually browse random websites, or watch a
short video.

"Well," they said, "if you know you can't work for a while, you
should watch a movie or something."

"Unfortunately," I replied, "I have to do something whose time
comes in short units, like browsing the Web or watching short
videos, because I might become able to work again at any time, and
I can't predict when -"

And then I stopped, because I'd just had a revelation.



I'd always thought of my workcycle as something *chaotic,*
something *unpredictable.*  I never used those words, but that was
the way I *treated* it.

But here my friends seemed to be implying - what a strange thought
- that *other* people could predict when they would become able to
work again, and structure their time accordingly.

And it occurred to me for the first time that I might have been
committing that damned old chestnut the
[Mind Projection Fallacy](http://lesswrong.com/lw/oi/mind_projection_fallacy/), right
out there in my ordinary everyday life instead of high
abstraction.

Maybe it wasn't that my productivity was*unusually**chaotic;* maybe
I was just*unusually**stupid* with respect to predicting it.

That's what inverted stupidity looks like - chaos.  Something hard
to handle, hard to grasp, hard to guess, something you can't do
anything with.  It's not just an idiom for high abstract things
like Artificial Intelligence.  It can apply in ordinary life too.

And the reason we don't think of the alternative explanation "I'm
stupid", is *not* - I suspect - that we think so highly of
ourselves.  It's just that we don't think of ourselves at all.  We
just see
[a chaotic feature of the environment](http://lesswrong.com/lw/oi/mind_projection_fallacy/).

So now it's occurred to me that my productivity problem may not be
chaos, but my own stupidity.

And that may or may not help anything.  It certainly doesn't fix
the problem right away.  Saying "I'm ignorant" doesn't make you
knowledgeable.

But it is, at least, a different path than saying "it's too
chaotic".
