
# Science as Attire

The preview for the *X-Men* movie has a voice-over saying:  "In
every human being... there is the genetic code... for mutation." 
Apparently you can acquire all sorts of neat abilities by
mutation.  The mutant Storm, for example, has the ability to throw
lightning bolts. 

I beg you, dear reader, to consider the biological machinery
necessary to generate electricity; the biological adaptations
necessary to avoid being harmed by electricity; and the cognitive
circuitry required for finely tuned control of lightning bolts.  If
we actually observed any organism acquiring these abilities
*in one generation,* as the result of *mutation,* it would outright
falsify the neo-Darwinian model of natural selection.  It would be
worse than finding rabbit fossils in the pre-Cambrian.  If
evolutionary theory could *actually* stretch to cover Storm, it
would
[be able to explain anything](/lw/if/your_strength_as_a_rationalist/),
and we all know what that would imply.

The *X-Men* comics use terms like "evolution", "mutation", and
"genetic code", purely to place themselves in what they conceive to
be the *literary genre* of science.  The part that scares me is
wondering how many people, especially in the media, understand
science *only* as a literary genre.

I encounter people who very definitely
[believe in](/lw/i6/professing_and_cheering/) evolution, who sneer
at the folly of creationists.  And yet they have no idea of what
the theory of evolutionary biology permits and prohibits.  They'll
talk about "the next step in the evolution of humanity", as if
natural selection got here by following a plan.  Or even worse,
they'll talk about something completely outside the domain of
evolutionary biology, like an improved design for computer chips,
or corporations splitting, or humans uploading themselves into
computers, and they'll call *that* "evolution".  If evolutionary
biology could cover that, it could cover anything.

Probably an actual majority of the people who *believe in*
evolution use the phrase
"[because of evolution](/lw/ip/fake_explanations/)" because they
want to be part of the scientific in-crowd -
[belief as scientific attire](/lw/i7/belief_as_attire/), like
wearing a lab coat.  If the scientific in-crowd instead used the
phrase "because of intelligent design", they would just as
cheerfully use that instead - it would make no difference to their
anticipation-controllers.  Saying "because of evolution" instead of
"because of intelligent design" does not, *for them,* prohibit
Storm.  Its only purpose, for them, is to identify with a tribe.

I encounter people who are quite willing to entertain the notion of
dumber-than-human Artificial Intelligence, or even mildly
smarter-than-human Artificial Intelligence.  Introduce the notion
of strongly superhuman Artificial Intelligence, and they'll
suddenly decide it's
"[pseudoscience](/lw/io/is_molecular_nanotechnology_scientific/)".
It's not that they think they have a theory of intelligence which
lets them calculate a theoretical upper bound on the power of an
optimization process.  Rather, they associate strongly superhuman
AI to the *literary genre* of apocalyptic literature; whereas an AI
running a small corporation associates to the literary genre of
*Wired* magazine.  They aren't speaking from within a model of
cognition.  They don't realize they *need* a model.  They don't
realize that science is *about* models.  Their devastating
critiques consist purely of
*comparisons to apocalyptic literature*, rather than, say, known
laws which prohibit such an outcome.  They understand science
*only*as a literary genre, or in-group to belong to.  The
[attire](/lw/i7/belief_as_attire/) doesn't look to them like a lab
coat; this isn't the football team they're
[cheering](/lw/i6/professing_and_cheering/) for.

Is there anything in science that you are *proud* of believing, and
yet you do not use the belief professionally?  You had best ask
yourself which future experiences your belief *prohibits* from
happening to you.  That is the sum of what you have assimilated and
made a true part of yourself.  Anything else is probably
[passwords](/lw/iq/guessing_the_teachers_password/) or
[attire](/lw/i7/belief_as_attire/).
