
# The Virtue of Narrowness

> What is true of one apple may not be true of another apple; thus more can be said about a single apple than about all the apples in the world.

Within their own professions, people grasp the importance of
narrowness; a car mechanic knows the difference between a
carburetor and a radiator, and would not think of them both as "car
parts".  A hunter-gatherer knows the difference between a lion and
a panther.  A janitor does not wipe the floor with window cleaner,
even if the bottles look similar to one who has not mastered the
art.

Outside their own professions, people often commit the misstep of
trying to broaden a word as widely as possible, to cover as much
territory as possible.  Is it not more glorious, more wise, more
impressive, to talk about *all* the apples in the world?  How much
loftier it must be to *explain human thought in general,* without
being distracted by smaller questions, such as how humans invent
techniques for solving a Rubik's Cube.  Indeed, it scarcely seems
necessary to consider *specific* questions at all; isn't a general
theory a worthy enough accomplishment on its own?



It is the way of the curious to lift up one pebble from among a
million pebbles on the shore, and see something new about it,
something interesting, something different. You call these pebbles
"diamonds", and ask what might be special about them - what inner
qualities they might have in common, beyond the glitter you first
noticed. And then someone else comes along and says: "Why not call
*this* pebble a diamond too? And this one, and this one?" They are
enthusiastic, and they mean well. For it seems undemocratic and
exclusionary and elitist and unholistic to call some pebbles
"diamonds", and others not. It seems... *narrow-minded...* if
you'll pardon the phrase. Hardly *open,* hardly *embracing,* hardly
*communal.*

You might think it poetic, to give one word many meanings, and
thereby spread shades of connotation all around. But even poets, if
they are good poets, must learn to see the world precisely. It is
not enough to compare love to a flower. Hot jealous unconsummated
love is not the same as the love of a couple married for decades.
If you need a flower to symbolize jealous love, you must go into
the garden, and look, and make subtle distinctions - find a flower
with a heady scent, and a bright color, and thorns. Even if your
intent is to shade meanings and cast connotations, you must keep
precise track of exactly which meanings you shade and connote.

It is a necessary part of the rationalist's art - or even the
poet's art! - to focus narrowly on unusual pebbles which possess
some special quality. And look at the details which those pebbles -
and those pebbles alone! - share among each other.  This is not a
sin.

It is perfectly all right for modern evolutionary biologists to
explain *just* the patterns of living creatures, and not the
"evolution" of stars or the "evolution" of technology.  Alas, some
unfortunate souls use the same word "evolution" to cover the
naturally selected patterns of replicating life, *and* the strictly
accidental structure of stars, *and* the intelligently configured
structure of technology.  And as we all know, if people use the
same word, it must all be the same thing.  You should automatically
generalize anything you think you know about biological evolution
to technology.  Anyone who tells you otherwise must be a mere
pointless pedant.  It couldn't possibly be that your abysmal
ignorance of modern evolutionary theory is so total that you can't
tell the difference between a carburetor and a radiator.  That's
unthinkable.  No, the *other* guy - you know, the one who's studied
the math - is just too dumb to see the connections.

And what could be more virtuous than seeing connections?  Surely
the wisest of all human beings are the New Age gurus who say
"Everything is connected to everything else."  If you ever say this
aloud, you should pause, so that everyone can absorb the sheer
shock of this Deep Wisdom.

There is a trivial mapping between a graph and its complement.  A
fully connected graph, with an edge between every two vertices,
conveys the same amount of information as a graph with no edges at
all.  The important graphs are the ones where some things are *not*
connected to some other things.

When the unenlightened ones try to be profound, they draw endless
verbal comparisons between this topic, and that topic, which is
like this, which is like that; until their graph is fully connected
and also totally useless. The remedy is specific knowledge and
in-depth study. When you understand things in detail, you can see
how they are *not* alike, and start enthusiastically subtracting
edges *off* your graph.

Likewise, the important categories are the ones that do not contain
everything in the universe.  Good hypotheses can only explain some
possible outcomes, and not others.

It was perfectly all right for Isaac Newton to explain *just*
gravity, *just* the way things fall down - and how planets orbit
the Sun, and how the Moon generates the tides - but *not* the role
of money in human society or how the heart pumps blood. Sneering at
narrowness is rather reminiscent of ancient Greeks who thought that
going out and actually *looking* at things was manual labor, and
manual labor was for slaves.

As Plato put it (in *The Republic, Book VII*):

> "If anyone should throw back his head and learn something by
> staring at the varied patterns on a ceiling, apparently you would
> think that he was contemplating with his reason, when he was only
> staring with his eyes... I cannot but believe that no study makes
> the soul look on high except that which is concerned with real
> being and the unseen. Whether he gape and stare upwards, or shut
> his mouth and stare downwards, if it be things of the senses that
> he tries to learn something about, I declare he never could learn,
> for none of these things admit of knowledge: I say his soul is
> looking down, not up, even if he is floating on his back on land or
> on sea!"

Many today make a similar mistake, and think that narrow concepts
are as lowly and unlofty and unphilosophical as, say, going out and
looking at things - an endeavor only suited to the underclass.  But
rationalists - and also poets - need narrow words to express
precise thoughts; they need categories which include only some
things, and exclude others. There's nothing wrong with focusing
your mind, narrowing your categories, excluding possibilities, and
sharpening your propositions. Really, there isn't! If you make your
words too broad, you end up with something that isn't true and
doesn't even make good poetry.

*And DON'T EVEN GET ME STARTED on people who think Wikipedia is an "Artificial Intelligence", the invention of LSD was a "Singularity" or that corporations are "superintelligent"!*
