
# The Futility of Emergence

The failures of [phlogiston](/lw/is/fake_causality/) and
[vitalism](/lw/iu/mysterious_answers_to_mysterious_questions/) are
[historical](/lw/im/hindsight_devalues_science/)
[hindsight](/lw/il/hindsight_bias/). Dare I step out on a limb, and
name some *current* theory which I deem analogously flawed?

I name *emergence*or *emergent phenomena* - usually defined as the
study of systems whose high-level behaviors arise or "emerge" from
the interaction of many low-level elements. 
([Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Emergence):  "The way
complex systems and patterns arise out of a multiplicity of
relatively simple interactions".)  Taken literally, that
description fits every phenomenon in our universe above the level
of individual quarks, which is part of the problem.  Imagine
pointing to a market crash and saying "It's not a quark!"  Does
that feel like an explanation?  No?  Then neither should saying
"It's an emergent phenomenon!"

It's the noun "emergence" that I protest, rather than the verb
"emerges from".  There's nothing wrong with saying "X emerges from
Y", where Y is some specific, detailed model with internal moving
parts.  "Arises from" is another legitimate phrase that means
exactly the same thing:  Gravity arises from the curvature of
spacetime, according to the specific mathematical model of General
Relativity. Chemistry arises from interactions between atoms,
according to the specific model of quantum electrodynamics.

Now suppose I should say that gravity is explained by "arisence" or
that chemistry is an "arising phenomenon", and claim that as my
explanation.



The phrase "emerges from" is acceptable, just like "arises from" or
"is caused by" are acceptable, if the phrase precedes some specific
model to be judged on its own merits.

However, this is *not* the way "emergence" is commonly used.
"Emergence" is commonly used as an explanation in its own right.

I have lost track of how many times I have heard people say,
"Intelligence is an emergent phenomenon!" as if that explained
intelligence. This usage fits all the checklist items for a
[mysterious answer to a mysterious question](/lw/iu/mysterious_answers_to_mysterious_questions/).
What do you know, after you have said that intelligence is
"emergent"?  You can make no new predictions.  You do not know
anything about the behavior of real-world minds that you did not
know before.  It feels like you believe a new fact, but you don't
anticipate any different outcomes. Your curiosity feels sated, but
it has not been fed.  The hypothesis has no moving parts - there's
no detailed internal model to manipulate.  Those who proffer the
hypothesis of "emergence" confess their ignorance of the internals,
and take pride in it; they contrast the science of "emergence" to
other sciences merely mundane.

And even after the answer of "Why? Emergence!" is given,
*the phenomenon is still a mystery* and possesses the same sacred
impenetrability it had at the start.

A fun exercise is to eliminate the adjective "emergent" from any
sentence in which it appears, and see if the sentence says anything
different:

-   *Before:*  Human intelligence is an emergent product of neurons
    firing.
-   *After:*  Human intelligence is a product of neurons firing.

-   *Before:*  The behavior of the ant colony is the emergent
    outcome of the interactions of many individual ants.
-   *After:*  The behavior of the ant colony is the outcome of the
    interactions of many individual ants.
-   *Even better:* A colony is made of ants. We can successfully
    predict some aspects of colony behavior using models that include
    only individual ants, without any global colony variables, showing
    that we understand how those colony behaviors arise from ant
    behaviors.

Another fun exercise is to replace the word "emergent" with the old
[word](/lw/iq/guessing_the_teachers_password/), the
[explanation](/lw/ip/fake_explanations/) that people had to use
before emergence was invented:

-   *Before:*  Life is an emergent phenomenon.
-   *After:*  Life is a magical phenomenon.

-   *Before:*  Human intelligence is an emergent product of neurons
    firing.
-   *After:*  Human intelligence is a magical product of neurons
    firing.

Does not each statement convey exactly the same amount of knowledge
about the phenomenon's behavior? Does not each hypothesis
[fit exactly the same set of outcomes](/lw/if/your_strength_as_a_rationalist/)?

"Emergence" has become very popular, just as saying "magic" used to
be very popular. "Emergence" has the same deep appeal to human
psychology, for the same reason. "Emergence" is such a wonderfully
easy explanation, and it feels good to say it; it gives you a
[sacred mystery](/lw/iu/mysterious_answers_to_mysterious_questions/)
to worship. Emergence is popular *because* it is the junk food of
curiosity. You can explain anything using emergence, and so people
do just that; for it feels so wonderful to explain things. Humans
are still humans, even if they've taken a few science classes in
college. Once they find a way to escape the
[shackles](http://yudkowsky.net/virtues/) of settled science, they
get up to the same shenanigans as their ancestors,
[dressed up in the literary genre of "science"](/lw/i7/belief_as_attire/)
but still the same species psychology.
