
# The Simple Truth

> "I remember this paper I wrote on existentialism. My teacher gave
> it back with an F. She’d underlined true and truth wherever it
> appeared in the essay, probably about twenty times, with a question
> mark beside each. She wanted to know what I meant by truth."  
> —Danielle Egan (journalist)

*Author’s Foreword:*

This essay is meant to restore a naive view of truth.

Someone says to you: “My miracle snake oil can rid you of lung
cancer in just three weeks.” You reply: “Didn’t a clinical study
show this claim to be untrue?” The one returns: “This notion of
‘truth’ is quite naive; what do you mean by ‘true’?”

Many people, so questioned, don’t know how to answer in exquisitely
rigorous detail. Nonetheless they would not be wise to abandon the
concept of ‘truth’. There was a time when no one knew the equations
of gravity in exquisitely rigorous detail, yet if you walked off a
cliff, you would fall.

Often I have seen – especially on Internet mailing lists – that
amidst other conversation, someone says “X is true”, and then an
argument breaks out over the use of the word ‘true’. This essay is
*not* meant as an encyclopedic reference for that argument. Rather,
I hope the arguers will read this essay, and then go back to
whatever they were discussing before someone questioned the nature
of truth.

In this essay I pose questions. If you see what seems like a really
obvious answer, it’s probably the answer I intend. The obvious
choice isn’t *always* the best choice, but sometimes, by golly, it
*is*. I don’t stop looking as soon I find an obvious answer, but if
I go on looking, and the obvious-seeming answer *still* seems
obvious, I don’t feel guilty about keeping it. Oh, sure, everyone
*thinks* two plus two is four, everyone *says* two plus two is
four, and in the mere mundane drudgery of everyday life everyone
*behaves* as if two plus two is four, but what does two plus two
*really, ultimately* equal? As near as I can figure, four. It’s
still four even if I intone the question in a solemn, portentous
tone of voice. Too simple, you say? Maybe, on this occasion, life
doesn’t *need* to be complicated. Wouldn’t that be refreshing?

If you are one of those fortunate folk to whom the question seems
trivial at the outset, I hope it still seems trivial at the finish.
If you find yourself stumped by deep and meaningful questions,
remember that if you know exactly how a system works, and could
build one yourself out of buckets and pebbles, it should not be a
mystery to you.

If confusion threatens when you interpret a metaphor as a metaphor,
try taking everything *completely literally.*


* * * * *

Imagine that in an era before recorded history or formal
mathematics, I am a shepherd and I have trouble tracking my sheep.
My sheep sleep in an enclosure, a fold; and the enclosure is high
enough to guard my sheep from wolves that roam by night. Each day I
must release my sheep from the fold to pasture and graze; each
night I must find my sheep and return them to the fold. If a sheep
is left outside, I will find its body the next morning, killed and
half-eaten by wolves. But it is so discouraging, to scour the
fields for hours, looking for one last sheep, when I know that
probably all the sheep are in the fold. Sometimes I give up early,
and usually I get away with it; but around a tenth of the time
there is a dead sheep the next morning.

If only there were some way to divine whether sheep are still
grazing, without the inconvenience of looking! I try several
methods: I toss the divination sticks of my tribe; I train my
psychic powers to locate sheep through clairvoyance; I search
carefully for reasons to believe all the sheep are in the fold. It
makes no difference. Around a tenth of the times I turn in early, I
find a dead sheep the next morning. Perhaps I realize that my
methods aren’t working, and perhaps I carefully excuse each
failure; but my dilemma is still the same. I can spend an hour
searching every possible nook and cranny, when most of the time
there are no remaining sheep; or I can go to sleep early and lose,
on the average, one-tenth of a sheep.

Late one afternoon I feel especially tired. I toss the divination
sticks and the divination sticks say that all the sheep have
returned. I visualize each nook and cranny, and I don’t imagine
scrying any sheep. I’m still not confident enough, so I look inside
the fold and it seems like there are a lot of sheep, and I review
my earlier efforts and decide that I was especially diligent. This
dissipates my anxiety, and I go to sleep. The next morning I
discover *two* dead sheep. Something inside me snaps, and I begin
thinking creatively.

That day, loud hammering noises come from the gate of the
sheepfold’s enclosure.

The next morning, I open the gate of the enclosure only a little
way, and as each sheep passes out of the enclosure, I drop a pebble
into a bucket nailed up next to the door. In the afternoon, as each
returning sheep passes by, I take one pebble out of the bucket.
When there are no pebbles left in the bucket, I can stop searching
and turn in for the night. It is a *brilliant* notion. It will
revolutionize shepherding.

That was the theory. In practice, it took considerable refinement
before the method worked reliably. Several times I searched for
hours and didn’t find any sheep, and the next morning there were no
stragglers. On each of these occasions it required deep thought to
figure out where my bucket system had failed. On returning from one
fruitless search, I thought back and realized that the bucket
already contained pebbles when I started; this, it turned out, was
a bad idea. Another time I randomly tossed pebbles into the bucket,
to amuse myself, between the morning and the afternoon; this too
was a bad idea, as I realized after searching for a few hours. But
I practiced my pebblecraft, and became a reasonably proficient
pebblecrafter.

One afternoon, a man richly attired in white robes, leafy laurels,
sandals, and business suit trudges in along the sandy trail that
leads to my pastures.

“Can I help you?” I inquire.

The man takes a badge from his coat and flips it open, proving
beyond the shadow of a doubt that he is Markos Sophisticus Maximus,
a delegate from the Senate of Rum. (One might wonder whether
another could steal the badge; but so great is the power of these
badges that if any other were to use them, they would in that
instant be *transformed* into Markos.)

“Call me Mark,” he says. “I’m here to confiscate the magic pebbles,
in the name of the Senate; artifacts of such great power must not
fall into ignorant hands.”

“That bleedin’ apprentice,” I grouse under my breath, “he’s been
yakkin’ to the villagers again.” Then I look at Mark’s stern face,
and sigh. “They aren’t magic pebbles,” I say aloud. “Just ordinary
stones I picked up from the ground.”

A flicker of confusion crosses Mark’s face, then he brightens
again. “I’m here for the magic bucket!” he declares.

“It’s not a magic bucket,” I say wearily. “I used to keep dirty
socks in it.”

Mark’s face is puzzled. “Then where is the magic?” he demands.

An interesting question. “It’s hard to explain,” I say.

My current apprentice, Autrey, attracted by the commotion, wanders
over and volunteers his explanation: “It’s the level of pebbles in
the bucket,” Autrey says. “There’s a magic level of pebbles, and
you have to get the level just right, or it doesn’t work. If you
throw in more pebbles, or take some out, the bucket won’t be at the
magic level anymore. Right now, the magic level is,” Autrey peers
into the bucket, “about one-third full.”

“I see!” Mark says excitedly. From his back pocket Mark takes out
his own bucket, and a heap of pebbles. Then he grabs a few handfuls
of pebbles, and stuffs them into the bucket. Then Mark looks into
the bucket, noting how many pebbles are there. “There we go,” Mark
says, “the magic level of this bucket is half full. Like that?”

“No!” Autrey says sharply. “Half full is not the magic level. The
magic level is about one-third. Half full is definitely unmagic.
Furthermore, you’re using the wrong bucket.”

Mark turns to me, puzzled. “I thought you said the bucket wasn’t
magic?”

“It’s not,” I say. A sheep passes out through the gate, and I toss
another pebble into the bucket. “Besides, I’m watching the sheep.
Talk to Autrey.”

Mark dubiously eyes the pebble I tossed in, but decides to
temporarily shelve the question. Mark turns to Autrey and draws
himself up haughtily. “It’s a free country,” Mark says, “under the
benevolent dictatorship of the Senate, of course. I can drop
whichever pebbles I like into whatever bucket I like.”

Autrey considers this. “No you can’t,” he says finally, “there
won’t be any magic.”

“Look,” says Mark patiently, “I watched you carefully. You looked
in your bucket, checked the level of pebbles, and called that the
magic level. I did exactly the same thing.”

“That’s not how it works,” says Autrey.

“Oh, I see,” says Mark, “It’s not the level of pebbles in *my*
bucket that’s magic, it’s the level of pebbles in *your* bucket. Is
that what you claim? What makes your bucket so much better than
mine, huh?”

“Well,” says Autrey, “if we were to empty your bucket, and then
pour all the pebbles from my bucket into your bucket, then your
bucket would have the magic level. There’s also a procedure we can
use to check if your bucket has the magic level, if we know that my
bucket has the magic level; we call that a bucket compare
operation.”

Another sheep passes, and I toss in another pebble.

“He just tossed in another pebble!” Mark says. “And I suppose you
claim the new level is also magic? I could toss pebbles into your
bucket until the level was the same as mine, and then our buckets
would agree. You’re just comparing my bucket to your bucket to
determine whether *you* think the level is ‘magic’ or not. Well, I
think *your* bucket isn’t magic, because it doesn’t have the same
level of pebbles as mine. So there!”

“Wait,” says Autrey, “you don’t understand -“

“By ‘magic level’, you mean simply the level of pebbles in your own
bucket. And when I say ‘magic level’, I mean the level of pebbles
in my bucket. Thus you look at my bucket and say it ‘isn’t magic’,
but the word ‘magic’ means different things to different people.
You need to specify *whose* magic it is. You should say that my
bucket doesn’t have ‘Autrey’s magic level’, and I say that your
bucket doesn’t have ‘Mark’s magic level’. That way, the apparent
contradiction goes away.”

“But -” says Autrey helplessly.

“Different people can have different buckets with different levels
of pebbles, which proves this business about ‘magic’ is completely
arbitrary and subjective.”

“Mark,” I say, “did anyone tell you what these pebbles *do?*“

“*Do?*” says Mark. “I thought they were just magic.”

“If the pebbles didn’t do anything,” says Autrey, “our ISO 9000
process efficiency auditor would eliminate the procedure from our
daily work.”

“What’s your auditor’s name?”

“Darwin,” says Autrey.

“Hm,” says Mark. “Charles does have a reputation as a strict
auditor. So do the pebbles bless the flocks, and cause the increase
of sheep?”

“No,” I say. “The virtue of the pebbles is this; if we look into
the bucket and see the bucket is empty of pebbles, we know the
pastures are likewise empty of sheep. If we do not use the bucket,
we must search and search until dark, lest one last sheep remain.
Or if we stop our work early, then sometimes the next morning we
find a dead sheep, for the wolves savage any sheep left outside. If
we look in the bucket, we know when all the sheep are home, and we
can retire without fear.”

Mark considers this. “That sounds rather implausible,” he says
eventually. “Did you consider using divination sticks? Divination
sticks are infallible, or at least, anyone who says they are
fallible is burned at the stake. This is an extremely painful way
to die; it follows that divination sticks are infallible.”

“You’re welcome to use divination sticks if you like,” I say.

“Oh, good heavens, of course not,” says Mark. “They work
infallibly, with absolute perfection on every occasion, as befits
such blessed instruments; but what if there were a dead sheep the
next morning? I only use the divination sticks when there is no
possibility of their being proven wrong. Otherwise I might be
burned alive. So how does your magic bucket work?”

How does the bucket work…? I’d better start with the simplest
possible case. “Well,” I say, “suppose the pastures are empty, and
the bucket isn’t empty. Then we’ll waste hours looking for a sheep
that isn’t there. And if there are sheep in the pastures, but the
bucket is empty, then Autrey and I will turn in too early, and
we’ll find dead sheep the next morning. So an empty bucket is
magical if and only if the pastures are empty -“

“Hold on,” says Autrey. “That sounds like a vacuous tautology to
me. Aren’t an empty bucket and empty pastures obviously the same
thing?”

“It’s not vacuous,” I say. “Here’s an analogy: The logician Alfred
Tarski once said that the assertion ‘Snow is white’ is true if and
only if snow is white. If you can understand that, you should be
able to see why an empty bucket is magical if and only if the
pastures are empty of sheep.”

“Hold on,” says Mark. “These are *buckets*. They don’t have
anything to do with *sheep*. Buckets and sheep are obviously
completely different. There’s no way the sheep can ever interact
with the bucket.”

“Then where do *you* think the magic comes from?” inquires Autrey.

Mark considers. “You said you could compare two buckets to check if
they had the same level… I can see how buckets can interact with
buckets. Maybe when you get a large collection of buckets, and they
all have the same level, *that’s* what generates the magic. I’ll
call that the coherentist theory of magic buckets.”

“Interesting,” says Autrey. “I know that my master is working on a
system with multiple buckets – he says it might work better because
of ‘redundancy’ and ‘error correction’. That sounds like
coherentism to me.”

“They’re not quite the same -” I start to say.

“Let’s test the coherentism theory of magic,” says Autrey. “I can
see you’ve got five more buckets in your back pocket. I’ll hand you
the bucket we’re using, and then you can fill up your other buckets
to the same level -“

Mark recoils in horror. “Stop! These buckets have been passed down
in my family for generations, and they’ve always had the same
level! If I accept your bucket, my bucket collection will become
less coherent, and the magic will go away!”

“But your *current* buckets don’t have anything to do with the
sheep!” protests Autrey.

Mark looks exasperated. “Look, I’ve explained before, there’s
obviously no way that sheep can interact with buckets. Buckets can
only interact with other buckets.”

“I toss in a pebble whenever a sheep passes,” I point out.

“When a sheep passes, you toss in a pebble?” Mark says. “What does
that have to do with anything?”

“It’s an interaction between the sheep and the pebbles,” I reply.

“No, it’s an interaction between the pebbles and *you*,” Mark says.
“The magic doesn’t come from the sheep, it comes from *you*. Mere
sheep are obviously nonmagical. The magic has to come from
*somewhere*, on the way to the bucket.”

I point at a wooden mechanism perched on the gate. “Do you see that
flap of cloth hanging down from that wooden contraption? We’re
still fiddling with that – it doesn’t work reliably – but when
sheep pass through, they disturb the cloth. When the cloth moves
aside, a pebble drops out of a reservoir and falls into the bucket.
That way, Autrey and I won’t have to toss in the pebbles
ourselves.”

Mark furrows his brow. “I don’t quite follow you… is the *cloth*
magical?”

I shrug. “I ordered it online from a company called Natural
Selections. The fabric is called Sensory Modality.” I pause, seeing
the incredulous expressions of Mark and Autrey. “I admit the names
are a bit New Agey. The point is that a passing sheep triggers a
chain of cause and effect that ends with a pebble in the bucket.
*Afterward* you can compare the bucket to other buckets, and so
on.”

“I still don’t get it,” Mark says. “You can’t fit a sheep into a
bucket. Only pebbles go in buckets, and it’s obvious that pebbles
only interact with other pebbles.”

“The sheep interact with things that interact with pebbles…” I
search for an analogy. “Suppose you look down at your shoelaces. A
photon leaves the Sun; then travels down through Earth’s
atmosphere; then bounces off your shoelaces; then passes through
the pupil of your eye; then strikes the retina; then is absorbed by
a rod or a cone. The photon’s energy makes the attached neuron
fire, which causes other neurons to fire. A neural activation
pattern in your visual cortex can interact with your beliefs about
your shoelaces, since beliefs about shoelaces also exist in neural
substrate. If you can understand that, you should be able to see
how a passing sheep causes a pebble to enter the bucket.”

“At exactly *which* point in the process does the pebble become
magic?” says Mark.

“It… um…” Now *I’m* starting to get confused. I shake my head to
clear away cobwebs. This all seemed simple enough when I woke up
this morning, and the pebble-and-bucket system hasn’t gotten any
more complicated since then. “This is a lot easier to understand if
you remember that the *point* of the system is to keep track of
sheep.”

Mark sighs sadly. “Never mind… it’s obvious you don’t know. Maybe
all pebbles are magical to start with, even before they enter the
bucket. We could call that position panpebblism.”

“Ha!” Autrey says, scorn rich in his voice. “Mere wishful thinking!
Not all pebbles are created equal. The pebbles in *your* bucket are
*not* magical. They’re only lumps of stone!”

Mark’s face turns stern. “Now,” he cries, “now you see the danger
of the road you walk! Once you say that some people’s pebbles are
magical and some are not, your pride will consume you! You will
think yourself superior to all others, and so fall! Many throughout
history have tortured and murdered because they thought their own
pebbles supreme!” A tinge of condescension enters Mark’s voice.
“Worshipping a level of pebbles as ‘magical’ implies that there’s
an absolute pebble level in a Supreme Bucket. Nobody believes in a
Supreme Bucket these days.”

“One,” I say. “Sheep are not absolute pebbles. Two, I don’t think
my bucket actually contains the sheep. Three, I don’t worship my
bucket level as perfect – I adjust it sometimes – and I do that
*because* I care about the sheep.”

“Besides,” says Autrey, “someone who believes that possessing
absolute pebbles *would* license torture and murder, is making a
mistake that has nothing to do with buckets. You’re solving the
wrong problem.”

Mark calms himself down. “I suppose I can’t expect any better from
mere shepherds. You probably believe that snow is white, don’t
you.”

“Um… yes?” says Autrey.

“It doesn’t bother you that *Joseph Stalin* believed that snow is
white?”

“Um… no?” says Autrey.

Mark gazes incredulously at Autrey, and finally shrugs. “Let’s
suppose, purely for the sake of argument, that your pebbles are
magical and mine aren’t. Can you tell me what the difference is?”

“My pebbles *represent* the sheep!” Autrey says triumphantly.
“*Your* pebbles don’t have the representativeness property, so they
won’t work. They are empty of meaning. Just look at them. There’s
no aura of semantic content; they are merely pebbles. You need a
bucket with special causal powers.”

“Ah!” Mark says. “Special causal powers, instead of magic.”

“Exactly,” says Autrey. “I’m not superstitious. Postulating magic,
in this day and age, would be unacceptable to the international
shepherding community. We have found that postulating magic simply
doesn’t work as an explanation for shepherding phenomena. So when I
see something I don’t understand, and I want to explain it using a
model with no internal detail that makes no predictions even in
retrospect, I postulate special causal powers. If that doesn’t
work, I’ll move on to calling it an emergent phenomenon.”

“What kind of special powers does the bucket have?” asks Mark.

“Hm,” says Autrey. “Maybe this bucket is imbued with an
*about-ness* relation to the pastures. That would explain why it
worked – when the bucket is empty, it *means* the pastures are
empty.”

“Where did you find this bucket?” says Mark. “And how did you
realize it had an about-ness relation to the pastures?”

“It’s an *ordinary bucket*,” I say. “I used to climb trees with it…
I don’t think this question *needs* to be difficult.”

“I’m talking to Autrey,” says Mark.

“You have to bind the bucket to the pastures, and the pebbles to
the sheep, using a magical ritual – pardon me, an emergent process
with special causal powers – that my master discovered,” Autrey
explains.

Autrey then attempts to describe the ritual, with Mark nodding
along in sage comprehension.

“You have to throw in a pebble *every* time a sheep leaves through
the gate?” says Mark. “Take out a pebble *every* time a sheep
returns?”

Autrey nods. “Yeah.”

“That must be really hard,” Mark says sympathetically.

Autrey brightens, soaking up Mark’s sympathy like rain. “Exactly!”
says Autrey. “It’s *extremely* hard on your emotions. When the
bucket has held its level for a while, you… tend to get attached to
that level.”

A sheep passes then, leaving through the gate. Autrey sees; he
stoops, picks up a pebble, holds it aloft in the air. “Behold!”
Autrey proclaims. “A sheep has passed! I must now toss a pebble
into this bucket, my dear bucket, and destroy that fond level which
has held for so long – ” Another sheep passes. Autrey, caught up in
his drama, misses it; so I plunk a pebble into the bucket. Autrey
is still speaking: ” – for that is the supreme test of the
shepherd, to throw in the pebble, be it ever so agonizing, be the
old level ever so precious. Indeed, only the best of shepherds can
meet a requirement so stern -“

“Autrey,” I say, “if you want to be a great shepherd someday, learn
to shut up and throw in the pebble. No fuss. No drama. Just do
it.”

“And this ritual,” says Mark, “it binds the pebbles to the sheep by
the magical laws of Sympathy and Contagion, like a voodoo doll.”

Autrey winces and looks around. “Please! Don’t call it Sympathy and
Contagion. We shepherds are an anti-superstitious folk. Use the
word ‘intentionality’, or something like that.”

“Can I look at a pebble?” says Mark.

“Sure,” I say. I take one of the pebbles out of the bucket, and
toss it to Mark. Then I reach to the ground, pick up another
pebble, and drop it into the bucket.

Autrey looks at me, puzzled. “Didn’t you just mess it up?”

I shrug. “I don’t think so. We’ll know I messed it up if there’s a
dead sheep next morning, or if we search for a few hours and don’t
find any sheep.”

“But -” Autrey says.

“I taught you everything *you* know, but I haven’t taught you
everything *I* know,” I say.

Mark is examining the pebble, staring at it intently. He holds his
hand over the pebble and mutters a few words, then shakes his head.
“I don’t sense any magical power,” he says. “Pardon me. I don’t
sense any intentionality.”

“A pebble only has intentionality if it’s inside a ma- an emergent
bucket,” says Autrey. “Otherwise it’s just a mere pebble.”

“Not a problem,” I say. I take a pebble out of the bucket, and toss
it away. Then I walk over to where Mark stands, tap his hand
holding a pebble, and say: “I declare this hand to be part of the
magic bucket!” Then I resume my post at the gates.

Autrey laughs. “Now you’re just being gratuitously evil.”

I nod, for this is indeed the case.

“Is that really going to work, though?” says Autrey.

I nod again, hoping that I’m right. I’ve done this before with two
buckets, and in principle, there should be no difference between
Mark’s hand and a bucket. Even if Mark’s hand is imbued with the
*elan vital* that distinguishes live matter from dead matter, the
trick should work as well as if Mark were a marble statue.

Mark is looking at his hand, a bit unnerved. “So… the pebble has
intentionality again, now?”

“Yep,” I say. “Don’t add any more pebbles to your hand, or throw
away the one you have, or you’ll break the ritual.”

Mark nods solemnly. Then he resumes inspecting the pebble. “I
understand now how your flocks grew so great,” Mark says. “With the
power of this bucket, you could keep in tossing pebbles, and the
sheep would keep returning from the fields. You could start with
just a few sheep, let them leave, then fill the bucket to the brim
before they returned. And if tending so many sheep grew tedious,
you could let them all leave, then empty almost all the pebbles
from the bucket, so that only a few returned… increasing the flocks
again when it came time for shearing… dear heavens, man! Do you
realize the sheer *power* of this ritual you’ve discovered? I can
only imagine the implications; humankind might leap ahead a decade
– no, a century!”

“It doesn’t work that way,” I say. “If you add a pebble when a
sheep hasn’t left, or remove a pebble when a sheep hasn’t come in,
that breaks the ritual. The power does not linger in the pebbles,
but vanishes all at once, like a soap bubble popping.”

Mark’s face is terribly disappointed. “Are you sure?”

I nod. “I tried that and it didn’t work.”

Mark sighs heavily. “And this… *math*... seemed so powerful and
useful until then… Oh, well. So much for human progress.”

“Mark, it was a *brilliant* idea,” Autrey says encouragingly. “The
notion didn’t occur to me, and yet it’s so obvious… it would save
an *enormous* amount of effort… there *must* be a way to salvage
your plan! We could try different buckets, looking for one that
would keep the magical pow- the intentionality in the pebbles, even
without the ritual. Or try other pebbles. Maybe our pebbles just
have the wrong properties to have *inherent* intentionality. What
if we tried it using stones carved to resemble tiny sheep? Or just
write ‘sheep’ on the pebbles; that might be enough.”

“Not going to work,” I predict dryly.

Autrey continues. “Maybe we need organic pebbles, instead of
silicon pebbles… or maybe we need to use expensive gemstones. The
price of gemstones doubles every eighteen months, so you could buy
a handful of cheap gemstones now, and wait, and in twenty years
they’d be really expensive.”

“You tried adding pebbles to create more sheep, and it didn’t
work?” Mark asks me. “What exactly did you do?”

“I took a handful of dollar bills. Then I hid the dollar bills
under a fold of my blanket, one by one; each time I hid another
bill, I took another paperclip from a box, making a small heap. I
was careful not to keep track in my head, so that all I knew was
that there were ‘many’ dollar bills, and ‘many’ paperclips. Then
when all the bills were hidden under my blanket, I added a single
additional paperclip to the heap, the equivalent of tossing an
extra pebble into the bucket. Then I started taking dollar bills
from under the fold, and putting the paperclips back into the box.
When I finished, a single paperclip was left over.”

“What does that result mean?” asks Autrey.

“It means the trick didn’t work. Once I broke ritual by that single
misstep, the power did not linger, but vanished instantly; the heap
of paperclips and the pile of dollar bills no longer went empty at
the same time.”

“You *actually* tried this?” asks Mark.

“Yes,” I say, “I actually performed the experiment, to verify that
the outcome matched my theoretical prediction. I have a sentimental
fondness for the scientific method, even when it seems absurd.
Besides, what if I’d been wrong?”

“If it *had* worked,” says Mark, “you would have been guilty of
counterfeiting! Imagine if everyone did that; the economy would
collapse! Everyone would have billions of dollars of currency, yet
there would be nothing for money to buy!”

“Not at all,” I reply. “By that same logic whereby adding another
paperclip to the heap creates another dollar bill, creating another
dollar bill would create an additional dollar’s worth of goods and
services.”

Mark shakes his head. “Counterfeiting is still a crime… You should
not have tried.”

“I was *reasonably* confident I would fail.”

“Aha!” says Mark. “You *expected* to fail! You didn’t *believe* you
could do it!”

“Indeed,” I admit. “You have guessed my expectations with stunning
accuracy.”

“Well, that’s the problem,” Mark says briskly. “Magic is fueled by
belief and willpower. If you don’t believe you can do it, you
can’t. You need to change your belief about the experimental
result; that will change the result itself.”

“Funny,” I say nostalgically, “that’s what Autrey said when I told
him about the pebble-and-bucket method. That it was too ridiculous
for him to believe, so it wouldn’t work for him.”

“How did you persuade him?” inquires Mark.

“I told him to shut up and follow instructions,” I say, “and when
the method worked, Autrey started believing in it.”

Mark frowns, puzzled. “That makes no sense. It doesn’t resolve the
essential chicken-and-egg dilemma.”

“Sure it does. The bucket method works whether or not you believe
in it.”

“That’s *absurd!*” sputters Mark. “I don’t believe in magic that
works whether or not you believe in it!”

“I said that too,” chimes in Autrey. “Apparently I was wrong.”

Mark screws up his face in concentration. “But… if you didn’t
believe in magic that works whether or not you believe in it, then
why did the bucket method work when you didn’t believe in it? Did
you believe in magic that works whether or not you believe in it
whether or not you believe in magic that works whether or not you
believe in it?”

“I don’t… *think* so…” says Autrey doubtfully.

“Then if you didn’t believe in magic that works whether or not you…
hold on a second, I need to work this out on paper and pencil -”
Mark scribbles frantically, looks skeptically at the result, turns
the piece of paper upside down, then gives up. “Never mind,” says
Mark. “Magic is difficult enough for me to comprehend; metamagic is
out of my depth.”

“Mark, I don’t think you understand the art of bucketcraft,” I say.
“It’s not about using pebbles to control sheep. It’s about making
sheep control pebbles. In this art, it is not necessary to begin by
believing the art will work. Rather, first the art works, then one
comes to believe that it works.”

“Or so you believe,” says Mark.

“So I believe,” I reply, “*because* it happens to be a fact. The
correspondence between reality and my beliefs comes from reality
controlling my beliefs, not the other way around.”

Another sheep passes, causing me to toss in another pebble.

“Ah! Now we come to the root of the problem,” says Mark. “What’s
this so-called ‘reality’ business? I understand what it means for a
hypothesis to be elegant, or falsifiable, or compatible with the
evidence. It sounds to me like calling a belief ‘true’ or ‘real’ or
‘actual’ is merely the difference between saying you believe
something, and saying you really really believe something.”

I pause. “Well…” I say slowly. “Frankly, I’m not entirely sure
myself where this ‘reality’ business comes from. I can’t create my
own reality in the lab, so I must not understand it yet. But
occasionally I believe strongly that something is going to happen,
and then something else happens instead. I need a name for
whatever-it-is that determines my experimental results, so I call
it ‘reality’. This ‘reality’ is somehow separate from even my very
best hypotheses. Even when I have a simple hypothesis, strongly
supported by all the evidence I know, sometimes I’m still
surprised. So I need different names for the thingies that
determine my predictions and the thingy that determines my
experimental results. I call the former thingies ‘belief’, and the
latter thingy ‘reality’.”

Mark snorts. “I don’t even know why I bother listening to this
obvious nonsense. Whatever you say about this so-called ‘reality’,
it is merely another belief. Even your belief that reality precedes
your beliefs is a belief. It follows, as a logical inevitability,
that reality does not exist; only beliefs exist.”

“Hold on,” says Autrey, “could you repeat that last part? You lost
me with that sharp swerve there in the middle.”

“No matter what you say about reality, it’s just another belief,”
explains Mark. “It follows with crushing necessity that there is no
reality, only beliefs.”

“I see,” I say. “The same way that no matter what you eat, you need
to eat it with your mouth. It follows that there is no food, only
mouths.”

“Precisely,” says Mark. “Everything that you eat has to be in your
mouth. How can there be food that exists outside your mouth? The
thought is nonsense, proving that ‘food’ is an incoherent notion.
That’s why we’re all starving to death; there’s no food.”

Autrey looks down at his stomach. “But I’m *not* starving to
death.”

“*Aha!*” shouts Mark triumphantly. “And how did you utter that very
objection? With your *mouth*, my friend! With your *mouth*! What
better demonstration could you ask that there is no food?”

“*What’s this about starvation?*” demands a harsh, rasping voice
from directly behind us. Autrey and I stay calm, having gone
through this before. Mark leaps a foot in the air, startled almost
out of his wits.

Inspector Darwin smiles tightly, pleased at achieving surprise, and
makes a small tick on his clipboard.

“Just a metaphor!” Mark says quickly. “You don’t need to take away
my mouth, or anything like that -“

“*Why* do you need a *mouth* if there is no *food*?” demands Darwin
angrily. “*Never mind.* I have no *time* for this *foolishness*. I
am here to inspect the *sheep.*“

“Flocks thriving, sir,” I say. “No dead sheep since January.”

“*Excellent.* I award you 0.12 units of *fitness*. Now what is this
*person* doing here? Is he a necessary part of the *operations?*“

“As far as I can see, he would be of more use to the human species
if hung off a hot-air balloon as ballast,” I say.

“Ouch,” says Autrey mildly.

“I do not *care* about the *human species*. Let him speak for
*himself*.”

Mark draws himself up haughtily. “This mere *shepherd*,” he says,
gesturing at me, “has claimed that there is such a thing as
reality. This offends me, for I know with deep and abiding
certainty that there is no truth. The concept of ‘truth’ is merely
a stratagem for people to impose their own beliefs on others. Every
culture has a different ‘truth’, and no culture’s ‘truth’ is
superior to any other. This that I have said holds at all times in
all places, and I insist that you agree.”

“Hold on a second,” says Autrey. “If nothing is true, why should I
believe you when you say that nothing is true?”

“I didn’t say that nothing is true -” says Mark.

“Yes, you did,” interjects Autrey, “I heard you.”

”- I said that ‘truth’ is an excuse used by some cultures to
enforce their beliefs on others. So when you say something is
‘true’, you mean only that it would be advantageous to your own
social group to have it believed.”

“And this that you have said,” I say, “is it true?”

“Absolutely, positively true!” says Mark emphatically. “People
create their own realities.”

“Hold on,” says Autrey, sounding puzzled again, “saying that people
create their own realities is, logically, a completely separate
issue from saying that there is no truth, a state of affairs I
cannot even imagine coherently, perhaps because you still have not
explained how exactly it is supposed to work -“

“There you go again,” says Mark exasperatedly, “trying to apply
your Western concepts of logic, rationality, reason, coherence, and
self-consistency.”

“Great,” mutters Autrey, “now I need to add a *third* subject
heading, to keep track of this entirely separate and distinct claim
-“

“It’s not separate,” says Mark. “Look, you’re taking the wrong
attitude by treating my statements as hypotheses, and carefully
deriving their consequences. You need to think of them as fully
general excuses, which I apply when anyone says something I don’t
like. It’s not so much a model of how the universe works, as a “Get
Out of Jail Free” card. The *key* is to apply the excuse
*selectively*. When I say that there is no such thing as truth,
that applies only to *your* claim that the magic bucket works
whether or not I believe in it. It does *not* apply to *my* claim
that there is no such thing as truth.”

“Um… why not?” inquires Autrey.

Mark heaves a patient sigh. “Autrey, do you think you’re the first
person to think of that question? To ask us how our own beliefs can
be meaningful if all beliefs are meaningless? That’s the same thing
many students say when they encounter this philosophy, which, I’ll
have you know, has many adherents and an extensive literature.”

“So what’s the answer?” says Autrey.

“We named it the ‘reflexivity problem’,” explains Mark.

“But what’s the *answer*?” persists Autrey.

Mark smiles condescendingly. “Believe me, Autrey, you’re not the
first person to think of such a simple question. There’s no point
in presenting it to us as a triumphant refutation.”

“But what’s the *actual answer?*“

“Now, I’d like to move on to the issue of how logic kills cute baby
seals -“

“*You* are wasting *time*,” snaps Inspector Darwin.

“Not to mention, losing track of sheep,” I say, tossing in another
pebble.

Inspector Darwin looks at the two arguers, both apparently
unwilling to give up their positions. “Listen,” Darwin says, more
kindly now, “I have a simple notion for resolving your dispute.
*You* say,” says Darwin, pointing to Mark, “that people’s beliefs
alter their personal realities. And *you* fervently believe,” his
finger swivels to point at Autrey, “that Mark’s beliefs *can’t*
alter reality. So let Mark believe really hard that he can fly, and
then step off a cliff. Mark shall see himself fly away like a bird,
and Autrey shall see him plummet down and go splat, and you shall
both be happy.”

We all pause, considering this.

“It *sounds* reasonable…” Mark says finally.

“There’s a cliff right there,” observes Inspector Darwin.

Autrey is wearing a look of intense concentration. Finally he
shouts: “Wait! If that were true, we would all have long since
departed into our own private universes, in which case the other
people here are only figments of your imagination – there’s no
point in trying to prove anything to us -“

A long dwindling scream comes from the nearby cliff, followed by a
dull and lonely splat. Inspector Darwin flips his clipboard to the
page that shows the current gene pool and pencils in a slightly
lower frequency for Mark’s alleles.

Autrey looks slightly sick. “Was that really necessary?”

“*Necessary?*” says Inspector Darwin, sounding puzzled. “It just
*happened*... I don’t quite understand your question.”

Autrey and I turn back to our bucket. It’s time to bring in the
sheep. You wouldn’t want to forget about that part. Otherwise what
would be the point?
