
# Distinct Configurations

Yesterday's experiment carried two key lessons:

First, we saw that because amplitude flows can cancel out, and
because our magic measure of squared modulus is not linear, the
identity of configurations is nailed down - you can't reorganize
configurations the way you can regroup possible worlds.  Which
configurations are the same, and which are distinct, has
experimental consequences; it is an observable fact.

Second, we saw that configurations are about multiple particles. 
If there are two photons entering the apparatus, that doesn't mean
there are two initial configurations.  Instead the initial
configuration's identity is "Two photons coming in."  (Ideally,
each configuration we talk about would include every particle in
the experiment - including the particles making up the mirrors and
detectors.  And in the real universe, every configuration is about
*all* the particles... *everywhere*.)

What makes for distinct configurations is not distinct particles. 
Each configuration is about every particle.  What makes
configurations distinct, is particles occupying different positions
- at least one particle in a different state.

To take one important demonstration...

[![Fig5\_2](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/04/11/fig5_2.gif "Fig5_2")](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/04/11/fig5_2.gif)
This is the same experiment as
[Figure 2](/lw/pd/configurations_and_amplitude/),  with one
important change:  Between **A** and **C** has been placed a
sensitive thingy, **S**.  The key attribute of **S** is that if a
photon goes past **S**, **S** ends up in a slightly different
state.

Let's say that the two possible states of **S** are *Yes* and
*No*.  **S** starts out in state *No*, and ends up in state *Yes*
if a photon goes past.

Then the initial configuration is:

> "A photon heading toward **A**; and **S** in state *No*."  (-1 +
> 0*i*)

Next, the action of the half-silvered mirror at **A**.  In the
[previous version of this experiment](/lw/pd/configurations_and_amplitude/),
without the sensitive thingy, the two resultant configurations were
"**A** to **B**" with amplitude -*i* and "**A** to **C**" with
amplitude -1.  Now, though, a new element has been introduced into
the system, and all configurations are about all particles, and so
every configuration mentions the new element.  So the amplitude
flows from the initial configuration are to:

> "Photon from **A** to **B**; and **S** in state *No*."  (0 +
> -*i*)  
> "Photon from **A** to **C**; and **S** in state *Yes.*"  (-1 +
> 0*i*)

Next, the action of the full mirrors at **B** and **C**:

> "Photon from **B** to **D**; and **S** in state *No*."  (1 +
> *0i*)  
> "Photon from **C** to **D**; and **S** in state *Yes.*"  (0 +
> -*i*)

And then the action of the half-mirror at **D**, on the amplitude
flowing from both of the above configurations:

1.  "Photon from **D** to **E**; and **S** in state *No*."  (0 +
    *i*)
2.  "Photon from **D** to **F**; and **S** in state *No*."  (1 +
    0*i*)
3.  "Photon from **D** to **E**; and **S** in state *Yes.*"  (0 +
    -*i*)
4.  "Photon from **D** to **F**; and **S** in state *Yes.*"  (1 +
    0*i*)

When we did this experiment without the sensitive thingy, the
amplitude flows (1) and (3) of (0 + *i*) and (0 + -*i*) to the
"**D** to **E**" configuration canceled each other out.  We were
left with no amplitude for a photon going to Detector 1 (way up at
the experimental level, we never observe a photon striking Detector
1).

But in this case, the two amplitude flows (1) and (3) are now to
distinct configurations; at least one entity, **S**, is in a
different state between (1) and (3).  The amplitudes don't cancel
out.

When we wave our magical squared-modulus-ratio detector over the
four final configurations, we find that the squared moduli of all
are equal:  25% probability each.  Way up at the level of the real
world, we find that the photon has an equal chance of striking
Detector 1 and Detector 2.

All the above is true, even if we, the researchers, don't care
about the state of **S**.  Unlike possible worlds, configurations
cannot be regrouped on a whim.  The laws of *physics* say the two
configurations are distinct; it's not a question of how *we* can
most conveniently parse up the world.

All the above is true, even if we don't bother to look at the state
of **S**.  The configurations (1) and (3) are distinct in physics,
even if we don't know the distinction.

All the above is true, even if we don't know **S** exists.  The
configurations (1) and (3) are distinct whether or not *we* have
distinct *mental representations* for the two possibilities.

All the above is true, even if we're in space, and **S** transmits
a new photon off toward the interstellar void in two distinct
directions, depending on whether the photon of interest passed it
or not.  So that we couldn't *ever* find out whether **S** had been
in *Yes* or *No*.  The state of **S** would be embodied in the
photon transmitted off to nowhere.  The lost photon can be an
[implied invisible](/lw/pb/belief_in_the_implied_invisible/), and
the state of **S** pragmatically undetectable; but the
configurations are still distinct.

(The main reason it *wouldn't* work, is if **S** were nudged, but
**S** had an original spread in configuration space that was larger
than the nudge.  Then you couldn't rely on the nudge to separate
the amplitude distribution over configuration space into distinct
lumps.  In reality, all this takes place within a differentiable
amplitude distribution over a continuous configuration space.)

Configurations are not belief states.  Their distinctness is an
objective fact with experimental consequences.  The configurations
are distinct even if no one knows the state of **S**; distinct even
if no intelligent entity can ever find out.  The configurations are
distinct so long as at least *one particle* in the universe
*anywhere* is in a different position.  This is experimentally
demonstrable.

Why am I emphasizing this?  Because back in the dark ages when no
one understood quantum physics...

[![Fig2\_2](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/04/11/fig2_2.gif "Fig2_2")](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/04/11/fig2_2.gif)

Okay, so imagine that you've got no clue what's really going on,
and you try the experiment in Figure 2, and no photons show up at
Detector 1.  Cool.

You also discover that when you put a block between **B** and
**D**, *or* a block between **A** and **C**, photons show up at
Detector 1 and Detector 2 in equal proportions.  But only one at a
time - Detector 1 or Detector 2 goes off, not both simultaneously.

So, yes, it *does*seem to you like you're dealing with a particle -
the photon is only in one place at one time, every time *you*see it
(we'll talk about the *real* reasons for this later).

And yet there's some kind of... *mysterious phenomenon...* that
prevents the photon from showing up in Detector 1.  And this
mysterious phenomenon depends on the photon being *able* to go both
ways.  Even though the photon only shows up in one detector or the
other, which shows, *you would think,* that the photon is only in
one place at a time.

[![Fig3\_2](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/04/11/fig3_2.gif "Fig3_2")](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/04/11/fig3_2.gif)
Which makes the whole pattern of the experiments seem pretty
bizarre!   After all, the photon either goes from **A** to **C**,
or from **A** to **B**; one or the other.  (Or so you would think,
if you were instinctively trying to break reality down into
individually real particles.)  But when you block off one course or
the other, you start getting different experimental results!

It's like the photon wants to be *allowed* to go both ways, even
though (you would think) it only goes one way or the other.  And it
can *tell* if you try to block it off, without actually
going*there* - if it'd gone there, it would have run into the
block, and not hit any detector at all.** **

It's as if mere *possibilities* could have causal effects, in
defiance of what the word "real" is usually thought to
*mean*...** **

But it's a bit early to jump to conclusions like *that*, when you
don't have a complete picture of what goes on inside the
experiment.

[![Fig5\_4](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/04/11/fig5_4.gif "Fig5_4")](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/04/11/fig5_4.gif)
So it occurs to you to put a sensor between **A** and **C**, so you
can tell which way the photon *really* goes on each occasion.

And the mysterious phenomenon goes away.

I mean, now how crazy is that?  What kind of paranoia does that
inspire in some poor scientist?

Okay, so in the 21st century we realize in order to "know" a
photon's history, the particles making up your brain
[have to be correlated](/lw/o5/the_second_law_of_thermodynamics_and_engines_of/)
with the photon's history.  If having a tiny little sensitive
thingy **S** that correlates to the photon's history, is enough to
distinguish the final configurations and prevent the amplitude
flows from canceling; then an entire sensor with a digital display,
never mind a human brain, will put *septillions*of particles in
different positions and prevent the amplitude flows from
canceling.

But if you hadn't worked that out yet...

Then you would ponder the sensor having banished the Mysterious
Phenomenon, and think:

The photon doesn't just want to be *physically* free to go either
way.  It's not a little wave going along an unblocked pathway,
because then just having a physically unblocked pathway would be
enough.

No... I'm not allowed to *know* which way the photon went.

The mysterious phenomenon...
*doesn't want me looking at it too closely*... while it's doing its
mysterious thing.

It's not *physical possibilities* that have an effect on reality...
only *epistemic possibilities.*  If I *know* which way the photon
went, it's no longer *plausible*that it went the other way... which
cuts off the mysterious phenomenon as effectively as putting a
block between **B** and **D**.

I have to *not observe* which way the photon went, in order for it
to always end up at Detector 2.  It has to be *reasonable*that the
photon could have gone to either **B** or **C**.  What I can *know*
is the determining factor, regardless of which physical paths I
leave open or closed.

STOP THE PRESSES!  MIND IS FUNDAMENTAL AFTER ALL!  CONSCIOUS
AWARENESS DETERMINES OUR EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS!

You can *still read* this kind of stuff.  In *physics textbooks.* 
Even now, when a majority of theoretical physicists know better. 
Stop the presses.  Please, stop the presses.

[Hindsight is 20/20](/lw/il/hindsight_bias/); and so it's easy to
say that, in hindsight, there were certain clues that this
interpretation was not correct.

Like, if you put the sensor between **A** and **C**
*but don't read it*, the mysterious phenomenon *still* goes away,
and the photon still sometimes ends up at Detector 1.  (Oh, but you
*could* have read it, and possibilities are real now...)

But it doesn't even have to be a *sensor,* a scientific instrument
that you built.  A single particle that gets nudged far enough will
dispel the interference.  A photon radiating off to where you'll
never see it again can do the trick.  Not much human involvement
there.  Not a whole lot of conscious awareness.

Maybe before you pull the dualist fire alarm on human brains being
physically special, you should provide experimental proof that a
rock can't play the same role in dispelling the Mysterious
Phenomenon as a human researcher?

But that's hindsight, and it's easy to call the shots in
hindsight.  Do you *really* think you could've done better than
John von Neumann, if you'd been alive at the time?  The point of
this kind of
[retrospective analysis](/lw/h6/chronophone_motivations/) is to ask
what kind of [fully general clues](/lw/h5/archimedess_chronophone/)
you could have followed, and whether there are any similar clues
you're ignoring now on current mysteries.

Though it *is* a little embarrassing that, even *after* the theory
of amplitudes and configurations had been worked out - with the
theory now giving the definite prediction that any nudged particle
would do the trick - early scientists *still* didn't get it.

But you see... it had been established as Common Wisdom that
configurations were possibilities, it was epistemic possibility
that mattered, amplitudes were a very strange sort of partial
information, and conscious observation made quantumness go away. 
And that it was best to avoid thinking too hard about the whole
business, so long as your experimental predictions came out right.
