
# Einstein's Speed

Yesterday I argued that the Powers Beyond Science are actually a
standard and necessary part of the social process of science.  In
particular, scientists must call upon their powers of individual
rationality to decide what ideas to test, in advance of the sort of
definite experiments that Science demands to bless an idea as
confirmed.  The ideal of Science does not try to *specify* this
process - we don't suppose that any public authority knows how
individual scientists should think - but this doesn't mean the
process is *unimportant.*

A readily understandable, non-disturbing example:

A scientist identifies a strong mathematical regularity in the
cumulative data of previous experiments.  But the corresponding
hypothesis has not yet made and *confirmed* a novel experimental
prediction - which his academic field demands; this is one of those
fields where you can perform controlled experiments without too
much trouble.  Thus the individual scientist has readily
understandable, rational reasons to believe (though not with
probability 1) something not yet blessed by Science as public
knowledge of humankind.

Noticing a regularity in a huge mass of experimental data, doesn't
seem all that *unscientific.*  You're still data-driven, right?

But that's because I deliberately chose a non-disturbing example. 
When Einstein invented General Relativity, he had almost no
experimental data to go on, except the precession of Mercury's
perihelion.  And (AFAIK) Einstein did not *use* that data, except
at the end.

Einstein generated the theory of Special Relativity using Mach's
Principle, which is the physicist's version of the
[Generalized Anti-Zombie Principle](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/04/anti-zombie-pri.html). 
You begin by saying, "It doesn't seem reasonable to me that you
could tell, in an enclosed room, how fast you and the room were
going.  Since this number shouldn't ought to be observable, it
shouldn't ought to exist in any meaningful sense."  You then
observe that Maxwell's Equations invoke a seemingly absolute speed
of propagation, *c*, commonly referred to as "the speed of light"
(though the quantum equations show it is the propagation speed of
all fundamental waves).  So you reformulate your physics in such
fashion that the absolute speed of a single object no longer
meaningfully exists, and only relative speeds exist.  I am skipping
over quite a bit here, obviously, but there are many excellent
introductions to relativity - it is not like the horrible situation
in quantum physics.

Einstein, having successfully done away with the notion of your
absolute speed inside an enclosed room, then set out to do away
with the notion of your absolute *acceleration* inside an enclosed
room.  It seemed to Einstein that there shouldn't ought to be a way
to differentiate, in an enclosed room, between the room
accelerating northward while the rest of the universe stayed still,
versus the rest of the universe accelerating southward while the
room stayed still.  If the rest of the universe accelerated, it
would produce gravitational waves that would accelerate you. 
Moving matter, then, should produce gravitational waves.

And because inertial mass and gravitational mass were always
exactly equivalent - unlike the situation in electromagnetics,
where an electron and a muon can have different masses but the same
electrical charge - gravity should reveal itself as a kind of
inertia.  The Earth should go around the Sun in some equivalent of
a "straight line".  This requires spacetime in the vicinity of the
Sun to be curved, so that if you drew a graph of the Earth's orbit
around the Sun, the line on the 4D graph paper would be locally
flat.  Then inertial and gravitational mass would be
*necessarily*equivalent, not just *coincidentally* equivalent.

(If that did not make any sense to you, there are good
introductions to General Relativity available as well.)

And of course the new theory had to obey Special Relativity, and
conserve energy, and conserve momentum, etcetera.

Einstein spent several years grasping the necessary mathematics to
describe curved metrics of spacetime.  Then he wrote down the
simplest theory that had the properties Einstein thought it ought
to have - including properties no one had ever observed, but that
Einstein thought fit in well with the character of other physical
laws.  Then Einstein cranked a bit, and got the previously
unexplained precession of Mercury right back out.

How impressive was this?

Well, let's put it this way.  In some small fraction of alternate
Earths proceeding from 1800 - perhaps even a sizeable fraction - it
would seem plausible that relativistic physics could have proceeded
in a similar fashion to our own
[great fiasco with quantum physics](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/05/if-many-worlds.html).

We can imagine that Lorentz's original "interpretation" of the
Lorentz contraction, as a physical distortion caused by movement
with respect to the ether, prevailed.  We can imagine that various
corrective factors, themselves unexplained, were added on to
Newtonian gravitational mechanics to explain the precession of
Mercury - attributed, perhaps, to strange distortions of the ether,
as in the Lorentz contraction.  Through the decades, further
corrective factors would be added on to account for other
astronomical observations.  Sufficiently precise atomic clocks, in
airplanes, would reveal that time ran a little faster than expected
at higher altitudes (time runs slower in more intense gravitational
fields, but they wouldn't know that) and more corrective "ethereal
factors" would be invented.

Until, *finally,* the many different empirically determined
"corrective factors" were unified into the simple equations of
General Relativity.

And the people in that alternate Earth would say, "The final
equation was simple, but there was no way you could *possibly*know
to arrive at that answer from *just* the perihelion precession of
Mercury.  It takes many, many *additional*experiments.  You must
have measured time running slower in a stronger gravitational
field; you must have measured light bending around stars.  Only
*then* can you imagine our unified theory of ethereal gravitation. 
No, not even a perfect Bayesian superintelligence could know it! -
for there would be many ad-hoc theories consistent with the
perihelion precession alone."

In our world, Einstein didn't even *use*the perihelion precession
of Mercury, except for verification of his answer produced by other
means.  Einstein sat down in his armchair, and thought about how
*he* would have designed the universe, to look the way he thought a
universe should look - for example, that you shouldn't ought to be
able to distinguish yourself accelerating in one direction, from
the rest of the universe accelerating in the other direction.

And Einstein executed the whole long (multi-year!) chain of
armchair reasoning, without making any mistakes that would have
required further experimental evidence to pull him back on track.

Even
[Jeffreyssai](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/05/eld-science.html)
would be grudgingly impressed.  Though he would still ding Einstein
a point or two for the cosmological constant.  (I don't ding
Einstein for the cosmological constant because it later turned out
to be real.  I try to
[avoid criticizing people on occasions where they are right](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/01/newcombs-proble.html).)

What would be the probability-theoretic perspective on Einstein's
feat?

Rather than observe the planets, and infer what laws might cover
their gravitation, Einstein was observing the other laws of
physics, and inferring what new law might follow the same pattern. 
Einstein wasn't finding an equation that covered the motion of
gravitational bodies.  Einstein was finding a
character-of-physical-law that covered previously observed
equations, and that he could crank to predict the next equation
that would be observed.

[Nobody knows](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/10/no-one-knows-wh.html)
where the laws of physics come from, but Einstein's success with
General Relativity shows that their common character is strong
enough to predict the correct form of one law from having observed
other laws, without necessarily needing to observe the precise
effects of the law.

(In a general sense, of course, Einstein did know by observation
that things fell down; but he did not get GR by backward inference
from Mercury's exact perihelion advance.)

So, from a Bayesian perspective, what Einstein did is still
induction, and still covered by the notion of a simple prior (Occam
prior) that gets updated by new evidence.  It's just the prior was
over the *possible characters of physical law,* and observing other
physical laws let Einstein update his model of
*the character of physical law*, which he then used to predict a
particular law of gravitation.

If you didn't have the concept of a "character of physical law",
what Einstein did would look like magic - plucking the correct
model of gravitation out of the space of all possible equations,
with vastly insufficient evidence.  But Einstein, by looking at
*other* laws, cut down the space of possibilities for the *next*
law.  He learned the alphabet in which physics was written,
constraints to govern his answer.  Not magic, but reasoning on a
higher level, across a wider domain, than what a naive reasoner
might conceive to be the "model space" of only this one law.

So from a probability-theoretic standpoint, Einstein was still
data-driven - he just used the data he *already had*, more
*effectively*.  Compared to any alternate Earths that demanded huge
quantities of *additional* data from astronomical observations and
clocks on airplanes to *hit them over the head* with General
Relativity.

There are numerous lessons we can derive from this.

I use Einstein as my example, even though it's clichĂŠ, because
Einstein was also unusual in that he *openly admitted* to knowing
things that Science hadn't confirmed.  Asked what he would have
done if Eddington's solar eclipse observation had failed to confirm
General Relativity, Einstein replied:  "Then I would feel sorry for
the good Lord.  The theory is correct."

According to prevailing notions of Science, this is arrogance - you
must accept the verdict of experiment, and not cling to your
personal ideas.

But as I concluded in
[Einstein's Arrogance](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/09/einsteins-arrog.html),
Einstein doesn't come off nearly as badly from a Bayesian
perspective. From a Bayesian perspective, in order to suggest
General Relativity at all, in order to even *think* about what
turned out to be the correct answer, Einstein must have had enough
evidence to identify the true answer in the theory-space.  It would
take only a little *more* evidence to justify (in a Bayesian sense)
being nearly certain of the theory.  And it was unlikely that
Einstein only had *exactly* enough evidence to bring the hypothesis
all the way up to his attention.

Any accusation of arrogance would have to center around the
question, "But Einstein, how did you know you had reasoned
correctly?" - to which I can only say:  Do not criticize people
when they turn out to be right!  Wait for an occasion where they
are wrong!  Otherwise you are missing the chance to see when
someone is thinking smarter than you - for you criticize them
whenever they depart from a
[preferred ritual of cognition](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/01/newcombs-proble.html).

Or consider the famous exchange between Einstein and Niels Bohr on
quantum theory - at a time when the then-current,
[single-world quantum theory](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/05/many-worlds-one.html)
seemed to be immensely well-confirmed experimentally; a time when,
by the standards of Science, the current (deranged) quantum theory
had simply won.

> Einstein:  "God does not play dice with the universe."  
> Bohr:  "Einstein, don't tell God what to do."

You've got to admire someone who can get into an argument with God
and win.

If you take off your Bayesian goggles, and look at Einstein
*in terms of what he actually did all day,* then the guy was
sitting around studying math and thinking about how *he* would
design the universe, rather than running out and looking at things
to gather more data.  What Einstein did, *successfully*, is exactly
the sort of high-minded feat of sheer intellect that Aristotle
*thought* he could do, but *couldn't.*  Not from a
probability-theoretic stance, mind you, but from the viewpoint of
what they did all day long.

[Science does not trust scientists](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/05/science-doesnt.html)
to do this, which is why General Relativity was not blessed as the
public knowledge of humanity until after it had made and verified a
novel experimental prediction - having to do with the bending of
light in a solar eclipse.  (It later turned out that particular
measurement was not precise enough to verify reliably, and had
favored GR essentially by luck.)

However, just because Science does not *trust* scientists to do
something, does not mean it is impossible.

But a word of caution here:  The reason why history books sometimes
record the names of scientists who thought great high-minded
thoughts, is not that high-minded thinking is *easier*, or
*more reliable.*  It is a priority bias:  Some scientist who
*successfully* reasoned from the
*smallest amount of experimental evidence* got to the truth
*first.*  This cannot be a matter of pure random chance:  The
theory space is too large, and Einstein won several times in a
row.  But out of all the scientists who *tried* to unravel a
puzzle, or who would have *eventually*succeeded given enough
evidence, history passes down to us the names of the scientists who
*successfully* got there *first*.  Bear that in mind, when you are
trying to derive lessons about how to reason prudently.

In everyday life, you want every scrap of evidence you can get. 
*Do not rely on being able to successfully think high-minded thoughts unless experimentation is so costly or dangerous that you have no other choice.*

But sometimes experiments are costly, and sometimes we prefer to
get there first... so you might consider trying to train yourself
in reasoning on scanty evidence,
*preferably in cases where you will later find out if you were right or wrong.* 
Trying to beat low-capitalization prediction markets might make for
good training in this? - though that is only speculation.

As of now, at least, reasoning based on scanty evidence is
something that modern-day science cannot reliably train modern-day
scientists to do *at all*.  Which may perhaps have something to do
with, oh, I don't know,
[not even trying](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/05/eld-science.html)?

Actually, I take that back.  The most sane thinking I have seen in
any scientific field comes from the field of evolutionary
psychology, possibly because they understand self-deception, but
also perhaps because they often (1) have to reason from scanty
evidence and (2) do later find out if they were right or wrong.  I
recommend to all aspiring rationalists that they study evolutionary
psychology simply to get a glimpse of what careful reasoning looks
like.  See particularly Tooby and Cosmides's "The Psychological
Foundations of Culture".

As for the possibility that *only* Einstein could do what Einstein
did... that it took superpowers beyond the reach of ordinary
mortals... here we run into some biases that would take a separate
post to analyze.  Let me put it this way:  It is possible, perhaps,
that only a genius could have done Einstein's actual historical
work.  But *potential*geniuses, in terms of raw intelligence, are
probably far more common than historical superachievers.  To put a
random number on it, I doubt that anything more than
one-in-a-million *g*-factor is required to be a potential
world-class genius, implying at least six thousand potential
Einsteins running around today.  And as for everyone else, I see no
reason why they should not aspire to use efficiently the evidence
that they have.

But my final moral is that
[the frontier where the individual scientist rationally knows something that Science has not yet confirmed](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/05/faster-than-sci.html),
is not always some innocently data-driven matter of spotting a
strong regularity in a mountain of experiments.  Sometimes the
scientist gets there by thinking great high-minded thoughts that
[Science does not trust you to think](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/05/faster-than-sci.html).

I will not say, "Don't try this at home."  I will say, "Don't think
this is easy."  We are not discussing, here, the victory of casual
opinions over professional scientists.  We are discussing the
sometime historical victories of one kind of professional effort
over another.  Never forget all the famous historical cases where
attempted armchair reasoning lost.
