
# Identity Isn't In Specific Atoms

Suppose I take two atoms of helium-4 in a balloon, and swap their
locations via teleportation.  I don't move them through the
intervening space; I just click my fingers and cause them to swap
places.  Afterward, the balloon looks just the same, but two of the
helium atoms have exchanged positions.

Now, did that scenario seem to make sense?  Can you imagine it
happening?

If you looked at that and said, "The operation of swapping two
helium-4 atoms produces an identical configuration - not a similar
configuration, an *identical* configuration, the same mathematical
object - and particles have no individual identities *per se* - so
what you just said is *physical nonsense*," then you're starting to
get quantum mechanics.

If you furthermore had any thoughts about a particular "helium
atom" being a factor in a subspace of an amplitude distribution
that happens to factorize that way, so that it makes no sense to
talk about swapping two identical multiplicative factors, when only
the combined amplitude distribution is real, then you're
*seriously* starting to get quantum mechanics.

If you thought about two similar billiard balls changing places
inside a balloon, but nobody on the outside being able to notice a
difference, then... oh, hell, I don't know, go back to the
[beginning of the series](/lw/pc/quantum_explanations/) and try
rereading the whole thing over the course of one day.  If that
still doesn't work, read an actual book on quantum mechanics. 
Feynman's *QED* is a great place to start - though not a good place
to finish, and it's not written from a pure realist perspective.

But if you did "get" quantum physics, then, as promised, we have
now come to the connection between the truth of quantum mechanics,
the lies of human intuitions, and the
[Generalized Anti-Zombie Principle](/lw/p9/the_generalized_antizombie_principle/).

Stirling Westrup previously
[commented](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/04/anti-zombie-pri.html#comment-109683950),
on the [GAZP](/lw/p9/the_generalized_antizombie_principle/) post:

> I found the previous articles on Zombies somewhat tedious... Still,
> now I'm glad I read through it all as I can see why you were so
> careful to lay down the foundations you did.
> 
> The question of what changes one can make to the brain while
> maintaining 'identity' has been been discussed many times on the
> Extropians list, and seldom with any sort of constructive results.
> 
> Today's article has already far exceeded the signal to noise ratio
> of any other discussion on the same topic that I've ever seen...

The Extropians email list that Westrup refers to, is the oldest
online gathering place of
[transhumanists](/lw/me/my_strange_beliefs/).  It is where I made
my debut as a writer, and it is where the cofounders of the
Singularity Institute met.  Though the list is not what it once
was...

There are certain topics, on the Extropians list, that have been
discussed over and over again, for years and years, without making
any progress.  Just the same arguments and counterarguments, over
and over again.

The worst of those infinite loops concerns the question of
*personal identity*.  For example, if you build an exact physical
replica of a human, using *different atoms,* but atoms of the
*same kind* in the *same places*, is it the *same person* or
*just a copy*?* *

This question has flared up at least once a year, always with the
same arguments and counterarguments, every year since I joined the
Extropians mailing list in 1996.  And I expect the Personal
Identity Wars started well before then.

I did *try* remarking, "Quantum mechanics says there
*isn't any such thing* as a 'different particle of the same kind',
so wherever your personal identity is, it sure isn't in
*particular atoms,* because there *isn't any such thing* as a
'particular atom'."

It didn't work, of course.  I didn't really expect it to.  Without
a
[long extended explanation](/lw/kg/expecting_short_inferential_distances/),
a remark like that
[doesn't actually mean anything](/lw/iq/guessing_the_teachers_password/).

The concept of reality as a sum of independent individual billiard
balls, seems to be built into the human parietal cortex - the
parietal cortex being the part of our brain that does spatial
modeling: navigating rooms, grasping objects, throwing rocks.

Even very young children, infants, look longer at a scene that
violates expectations - for example, a scene where a ball rolls
behind a screen, and then two balls roll out.

People try to think of a *person*, an *identity,* an *awareness,*
as though it's an awareness-ball located inside someone's skull. 
Even nonsophisticated materialists tend to think that, since the
consciousness ball is made up of lots of little billiard balls
called "atoms", if you swap the atoms, why, you must have swapped
the consciousness.

Now even without knowing any quantum physics - even in a purely
classical universe - it is possible to refute this idea by applying
the
[Generalized Anti-Zombie Principle](/lw/p9/the_generalized_antizombie_principle/). 
There are many possible formulations of the GAZP, but one of the
simpler ones says that, if alleged gigantic changes are occurring
in your consciousness, you really ought to
*notice something happening,* and be able to say so.

The equivalent of the Zombie World, for questions of
identity/continuity, is the Soul Swap World.  The allegation is
that the Soul Swap World is microphysically identical to our own;
but every five minutes, each thread of consciousness jumps to a
random new brain, without the brains changing in any third-party
experimentally detectable way.  One second you're *yourself,* the
next second you're Britney Spears.  And neither of you *say* that
you've noticed anything happening - by hypothesis, since you're
microphysically identical down to the motion of your lips.

(Let me know if the Soul Swap World has been previously invented in
philosophy, and has a standard name - so far as I presently know,
this is my own idea.)

We can proceed to demolish the Soul Swap World by an argument
exactly analogous to the one that
[demolished the Zombie World](/lw/p7/zombies_zombies/): 
Whatever-it-is which makes me feel that I have a consciousness that
continues through time, that whatever-it-is was physically potent
enough to make me type this sentence.  Should I try to make the
phrase "consciousness continuing through time" *refer*to something
that has nothing to do with the *cause*of my typing those selfsame
words, I will have problems with the *meaning*of my arguments, not
just their plausibility.

Whatever it is that makes me say, aloud, that I have a personal
identity, a causally closed world physically identical to our own,
has captured that source - if there is any source at all.

And we can proceed, again by an exactly analogous argument, to a
Generalized Anti-Swapping Principle:  Flicking a disconnected light
switch shouldn't switch your personal identity, even though the
motion of the switch has an in-principle detectable gravitational
effect on your brain, because the switch flick can't disturb the
true cause of your talking about "the experience of subjective
continuity".

So even in a classical universe, if you snap your fingers and swap
an atom in the brain for a *physically similar* atom outside; and
the brain is not disturbed, or not disturbed any more than the
level of thermal noise; then whatever causes the experience of
subjective continuity, should also not have been disturbed.  Even
if you swap *all* the classical atoms in a brain at the
*same time,* if the person doesn't *notice*anything happen, why, it
probably didn't.

And of course there's the classic (and classical) argument, "Well,
your body's turnover time for atoms is seven years on average."

But it's a moot argument.

We don't live in a classical universe.

We live in a quantum universe where the notion of "same hydrogen
atom vs. different hydrogen atom" is *physical nonsense.*

We live in a universe where the whole notion of billiard balls
bopping around is *fundamentally wrong*.

This can be a disorienting realization, if you formerly thought of
*yourself* as an awareness ball that moves around.

Sorry.  Your parietal cortex is fooling you on this one.

But wait!  It gets even worse!

The brain doesn't exactly repeat itself; the state of your brain
one second from now is not the state of your brain one second ago. 
The neural connections don't *all* change *every*second, of
course.  But there are enough changes every second that the brain's
state is not cyclic, not over the course of a human lifetime.  With
every fragment of memory you lay down - and every thought that pops
in and out of short-term memory - and every glance of your eyes
that changes the visual field of your visual cortex - you ensure
that you never repeat yourself exactly.

Over the course of a single *second* - not seven years, but
*one second* - the joint position of all the atoms in your brain,
will change far enough away from what it was before, that there is
no *overlap* with the previous *joint amplitude distribution*.  The
brain doesn't repeat itself.  Over the course of *one second,* you
will end up being comprised of a
*completely different, nonoverlapping volume of configuration space*.

And the quantum configuration space is the most fundamental known
reality, according to our best current theory, remember.  Even if
quantum theory turns out not to be really truly fundamental, it has
already finished superseding the hallucination of individual
particles.  We're never going back to billiard balls, any more than
we're going back to Newtonian mechanics or phlogiston theory.  The
ratchet of science turns, but it doesn't turn backward.

And actually, the time for you to be comprised of a completely
different volume of configuration space, is way less than a
second.  That time is the product of all the individual changes in
your brain put together.  It'll be less than a millisecond, less
than a femtosecond, less than the time it takes light to cross a
neutron diameter.  It works out to less than the
[Planck time](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planck_time), if that
turns out to make physical sense.

And then there's the point to consider that the *physically real*
amplitude distribution is over a configuration space of all the
particles in the universe.  "You" are just a factored subspace of
that distribution.

Yes, that's right, I'm calling *you* a factored subspace.

None of this should be taken as saying that you are somehow
*independent* of the quantum physics comprising you.  If an anvil
falls on your head, you will stop talking about consciousness. 
This is experimentally testable.  Don't try it at home.

But the notion that you can equate your personal *continuity*, with
the *identity* of any physically real constituent of your
existence, is absolutely and utterly hopeless.

You are not "the same you, because you are made of the same
atoms".  You have zero overlap with the *fundamental*constituents
of yourself from even one nanosecond ago.  There is continuity of
information, but not equality of parts.

The new factor over the subspace looks a *whole lot* like the old
you, and not by coincidence:  The flow of time is lawful, there are
causes and effects and preserved commonalities.  Look to the
regularity of physics, if you seek a source of continuity.  Do not
ask to be composed of the same objects, for this is hopeless.

Whatever makes you feel that your present is connected to your
past, it has nothing to do with an *identity* of
*physically fundamental* constituents over time.

Which you could deduce *a priori*, even in a classical universe,
using the Generalized Anti-Zombie Principle.  The imaginary
identity-tags that read "This is electron \#234,567..." don't
affect particle motions or anything else; they can be swapped
without making a difference because they're epiphenomenal.  But
since this final conclusion happens to be counterintuitive to a
human parietal cortex, it helps to have the brute fact of quantum
mechanics to crush all opposition.

*Damn,* have I waited a long time to be able to say that.

And no, this isn't the only point I have to make on how
counterintuitive physics rules out intuitive conceptions of
personal identity.  I've got even stranger points to make.  But
those will take more physics first.
