
# No Individual Particles

Even babies think that objects have individual identities.  If you
show an infant a ball rolling behind a screen, and then a moment
later, two balls roll out, the infant looks longer at the
expectation-violating event.  Long before we're old enough to talk,
we have a parietal cortex that does spatial modeling: that models
individual animals running or rocks flying through 3D space.

And this is just not the way the universe works.  The difference is
experimentally knowable, and known.  Grasping this fact, being able
to see it at a glance, is one of the fundamental bridges to cross
in understanding quantum mechanics.

If you [shouldn't start off](/lw/pc/quantum_explanations/) by
talking to your students about wave/particle duality, where should
a quantum explanation start?  I would suggest taking, as your first
goal in teaching, explaining how quantum physics implies that a
simple experimental test can show that two electrons are
*entirely*indistinguishable* * - not just indistinguishable
according to known measurements of mass and electrical charge.

To grasp on a *gut level* how this is possible, it is necessary to
move from thinking in billiard balls to thinking in configuration
spaces; and then you have truly entered into the true and quantum
realm.

In previous posts such as
[Joint Configurations](/lw/pe/joint_configurations/) and
[The Quantum Arena](/lw/pj/the_quantum_arena/), we've seen that the
physics of our universe takes place in a multi-particle
configuration space.

[![Conf6\_2](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/04/15/conf6_2.png "Conf6_2")](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/04/15/conf6_2.png)The
illusion of individual particles arises from approximate
factorizability of a multi-particle distribution, as shown at left
for a classical configuration space.

If the probability distribution over this 2D configuration space of
two classical 1D particles, looks like a rectangular plaid pattern,
then it will factorize into a distribution over A times a
distribution over B.

In classical physics, the particles A and B are the fundamental
things, and the configuration space is just an isomorphic way of
looking at them.

In quantum physics, the configuration space is the fundamental
thing, and you get the appearance of an individual particle when
the amplitude distribution factorizes enough to let you look at a
*subspace* of the configuration space, and see a *factor* of the
amplitude distribution - a factor that might look something like
this:

[![Ampl1](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/04/15/ampl1.png "Ampl1")](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/04/15/ampl1.png)

This isn't an amplitude distribution, mind you.  It's a *factor* in
an amplitude distribution, which you'd have to multiply by the
subspace for all the *other* particles in the universe, to
approximate the *physically real* amplitude distribution.

Most mathematically possible amplitude distributions won't factor
this way.  *Quantum entanglement* is not some extra, special,
additional bond between two particles.  "Quantum entanglement" is
the *general* case.  The *special and unusual* case is
*quantum independence*.

Reluctant tourists in a quantum universe talk about the bizarre
phenomenon of quantum entanglement.  Natives of a quantum universe
talk about the special case of quantum independence.  Try to think
like a native, because you are one.

I've previously described a configuration as a mathematical object
whose identity is "A photon here, a photon there; an electron here,
an electron there."  But this is not quite correct.  Whenever you
see a real-world electron, caught in a little electron trap or
whatever, you are looking at a *blob* of amplitude, not a point
mass.  In fact, what you're looking at is a
*blob of amplitude-factor* in a subspace of a global distribution
that happens to factorize.

Clearly, then, an *individual point* in the configuration space
does not have an identity of "blob of amplitude-factor here, blob
of amplitude-factor there"; so it doesn't make sense to say that a
configuration has the identity "A photon here, a photon there."

But what *is* an individual point in the configuration space,
then?

Well, it's physics, and physics is math, and you've got to come to
terms with thinking in pure mathematical objects.  A single point
in quantum configuration space, is the *product*of multiple
*point positions* per quantum field; multiple point positions in
the electron field, in the photon field, in the quark field, etc.

When you actually see an electron trapped in a little electron
trap, what's *really* going on, is that the cloud of amplitude
distribution that includes you and your observed universe, can at
least roughly factorize into a subspace that corresponds to that
little electron, and a subspace that corresponds to everything else
in the universe.  So that the *physically real* amplitude
distribution is roughly the *product* of a little blob of
amplitude-factor in the subspace for that electron, and the
amplitude-factor for everything else in the universe.  Got it?

One commenter
[reports](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/04/identical-parti/comments/page/2/#comment-111012366)
attaining enlightenment on reading in
[Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_field_theory):

> 'From the point of view of quantum field theory, particles are
> identical if and only if they are excitations of the same
> underlying quantum field. Thus, the question "why are all electrons
> identical?" arises from mistakenly regarding individual electrons
> as fundamental objects, when in fact it is only the electron field
> that is fundamental.'

Okay, but that doesn't make the basic jump into a quantum
configuration space that is inherently over multiple particles.  It
just sounds like you're talking about individual disturbances in
the aether, or something.  As I understand it, an electron isn't an
*excitation* of a quantum electron field, like a wave in the
aether; the electron is a blob of amplitude-factor in a subspace of
a configuration space whose points correspond to multiple point
positions in quantum fields, etc.

The difficult jump from classical to quantum is *not* thinking of
an electron as an excitation of a field.  Then you could just think
of a universe made up of "Excitation A in electron field over here"
+ "Excitation B in electron field over there" + etc.  You could
factorize the universe into individual excitations of a field. 
Your parietal cortex would have no trouble with that one - it
doesn't care whether you call the little billiard balls
"excitations of an electron field" so long as they still behave
like little billiard balls.

The difficult jump is thinking of a configuration space that is the
product of many positions in many fields, without individual
identities for the positions.  A configuration space whose points
are "a position*here* in *this* field, a position *there* in *this*
field, a position *here* in *that* field, and a position *there* in
*that* field".  Not, "A positioned here in this field, B positioned
there in this field, C positioned here in that field" etc.

You have to reduce the appearance of individual particles to a
regularity in something that is *different* from the appearance of
particles, something that *is not itself a little billiard ball.*

Oh, sure, thinking of photons as individual objects will *seem* to
work out, as long as the amplitude distribution happens t
factorize.  But what happens when you've got your "individual"
photon A and your "individual" photon B, and you're in a situation
where, a la [Feynman paths](/lw/pk/feynman_paths/), it's possible
for photon A to end up in position 1 and photon B to end up in
position 2, *or* for A to end up in 2 and B to end up in 1?  Then
the illusion of classicality breaks down, because the amplitude
flows overlap:  
[![Ampl3\_3](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/04/15/ampl3_3.png "Ampl3_3")](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/04/15/ampl3_3.png)

In that [triangular region](/lw/pj/the_quantum_arena/) where the
distribution overlaps itself, no fact exists as to which particle
is which, even in principle - and in the real world, we often get a
lot more overlap than that.

I mean, imagine that I take a balloon full of photons, and shake it
up.

Amplitude's gonna go all over the place.  If you label all the
original apparent-photons, there's gonna be Feynman paths for
photons A, B, C ending up at positions 1, 2, 3 via a zillion
different paths and permutations.

The amplitude-factor that corresponds to the "balloon full of
photons" subspace, which contains bulges of amplitude-subfactor at
various different locations in the photon field, will undergo a
continuously branching evolution that involves each of the original
bulges ending up in many different places by all sorts of paths,
and the final configuration will have amplitude contributed from
many different permutations.

It's not that you *don't know* which photon went where.  It's that
*no fact of the matter exists.* The illusion of individuality, the
classical hallucination, has simply broken down.

And the same would hold true of a balloon full of quarks or a
balloon full of electrons.  Or even a balloon full of helium.
Helium atoms can end up in the same places, via different
permutations, and have their amplitudes add just like photons.

*Don't* be tempted to look at the balloon, and think, "Well, helium
atom A could have gone to 1, or it could have gone to 2; and helium
atom B could have gone to 1 or 2; quantum physics says the atoms
both sort of split, and each went both ways; and now the final
helium atoms at 1 and 2 are a mixture of the identities of A and
B."  Don't torture your poor parietal cortex so.  It wasn't built
for such usage.

Just stop thinking in terms of little billiard balls, with or
without confused identities.  Start thinking in terms of amplitude
flows in configuration space.  That's all there ever is.

And *then* it will seem completely intuitive that a simple
experiment can tell you whether two blobs of amplitude-factor are
over the same quantum field.

Just perform any experiment where the two blobs end up in the same
positions, via different permutations, and see if the amplitudes
add.
