
# Quantum Explanations

I think I must now temporarily digress from the sequence on
[zombies](/lw/p9/the_generalized_antizombie_principle/) (which was
a digression from the discussion of
[reductionism](/lw/on/reductionism/), which was a digression from
the [Mind Projection Fallacy](/lw/oi/mind_projection_fallacy/)) in
order to discuss quantum mechanics.  The reasons why this belongs
in the middle of a discussion on zombies in the middle of a
discussion of reductionism in the middle of a discussion of the
Mind Projection Fallacy, will become apparent eventually.

It's a sequence that has been weighing on my mind, demanding to be
written, for a quite a long time.  Years.  This seems like a good
time to insert it.

I wrote the
"[Intuitive Explanation of Bayesian Reasoning](http://yudkowsky.net/bayes/bayes.html)"
because people were complaining that Bayes's Theorem was
"counterintuitive" - in fact it was *famously* counterintuitive -
and this did not seem right.  The equation just did not seem
complicated enough to deserve the fearsome reputation it had.  So I
tried explaining it *my way,* and I did not manage to reach my
original target of elementary school students, but I get frequent
grateful emails from formerly confused folks ranging from reporters
to outside academic college professors.

I am not a physicist, and physicists famously hate it when
non-professional-physicists talk about QM.  But I do have some
experience with explaining mathy things that are allegedly "hard to
understand".

Besides, as a Bayesian, I don't believe in phenomena that are
*inherently* confusing.  Confusion exists in our models of the
world, not in the world itself.  If a subject is widely known as
*confusing*, not just *difficult*... you shouldn't leave it at
that.  It doesn't satisfice; it is not an okay place to be.  Maybe
you can fix the problem, maybe you can't; but you shouldn't be
*happy*to leave students confused.

The first way in which my introduction is going to depart from the
traditional, standard introduction to QM, is that I am *not*going
to tell you that quantum mechanics is supposed* *to be confusing.

I am not going to tell you that it's okay for you to not understand
quantum mechanics, because no one understands quantum mechanics, as
Richard Feynman once claimed.  There was a historical time when
this was true, but we no longer live in that era.

I am not going to tell you:  "You don't understand quantum
mechanics, you just get used to it."  (As von Neumann is reputed to
have said; back in the dark decades when, in fact, no one *did*
understand quantum mechanics.)

Explanations are supposed to make you *less confused.*  If you feel
like you don't understand something, this indicates a *problem* -
either with you, or your teacher - but at any rate a problem; and
you should move to *resolve* the problem.* *

I am not going to tell you that quantum mechanics is
*weird, bizarre, confusing,* or *alien.*  QM is counterintuitive,
but that is a problem with your intuitions, not a problem with
quantum mechanics.  Quantum mechanics has been around for billions
of years before the Sun coalesced from interstellar hydrogen. 
Quantum mechanics was here before you were, and if you have a
problem with that, *you* are the one who needs to change.  QM sure
won't.  There are no *surprising facts*, only *models* that are
*surprised by* facts; and if a model is surprised by the facts, it
is no credit to that model.

It is always best to think of reality as perfectly normal.  Since
the beginning, not one unusual thing has ever happened.

The *goal* is to become completely at home in a quantum universe. 
Like a native.  Because, in fact, that is where you live.

In the coming sequence on quantum mechanics, I am going to
consistently speak as if quantum mechanics is *perfectly normal*;
and when human intuitions depart from quantum mechanics, I am going
to make fun of the *intuitions* for being weird and unusual.  This
may seem odd, but the point is to swing your mind around to a
*native* quantum point of view.

Another thing:  The traditional introduction to quantum mechanics
closely follows the order in which quantum mechanics was
discovered.

The traditional introduction starts by saying that matter sometimes
behaves like little billiard balls bopping around, and sometimes
behaves like crests and troughs moving through a pool of water. 
Then the traditional introduction gives some examples of matter
acting like a little billiard ball, and some examples of it acting
like an ocean wave.

Now, it happens to be a historical fact that, back when students of
matter were working all this stuff out and had *no clue* about the
true underlying math, those early scientists first thought that
matter was like little billiard balls.  And then that it was like
waves in the ocean.  And then that it was like billiard balls
again.  And then the early scientists got *really* confused, and
stayed that way for several decades, until it was finally sorted
out in the second half of the twentieth century.

Dragging a modern-day student through all this may be a
*historically realistic* approach to the subject matter, but it
also ensures the historically realistic outcome of
*total bewilderment.*  Talking to aspiring young physicists about
"wave/particle duality" is like starting chemistry students on the
Four Elements.

An electron is *not* a billiard ball, and it's *not* a crest and
trough moving through a pool of water.  An electron is a
mathematically different sort of entity,
*all the time and under all circumstances,* and it has to be
accepted on its own terms.

The universe is not wavering between using particles and waves,
unable to make up its mind.  It's only human *intuitions* about QM
that swap back and forth.  The intuitions we have for billiard
balls, and the intuitions we have for crests and troughs in a pool
of water, both look *sort of* like they're applicable to electrons,
at different times and under different circumstances.  But the
truth is that both intuitions simply *aren't applicable.*

If you try to think of an electron as being like a billiard ball on
some days, and like an ocean wave on other days, you will
*confuse the living daylights* out of yourself.

Yet it's your eyes that are wobbling and unstable, not the world.

Furthermore:

The order in which humanity *discovered* things is not necessarily
the best order in which to *teach* them.  First, humanity noticed
that there were other animals running around.  Then we cut them
open and found that they were full of organs.  Then we examined the
organs carefully and found they were made of tissues.  Then we
looked at the tissues under a microscope and discovered cells,
which are made of proteins and some other chemically synthesized
stuff.  Which are made of molecules, which are made of atoms, which
are made of protons and neutrons and electrons
*which are way simpler than entire animals but were discovered tens of thousands of years later.*

Physics doesn't start by talking about biology.  So why should it
start by talking about very high-level complicated phenomena, like,
say, the observed results of experiments?

The ordinary way of teaching QM keeps stressing the experimental
results.  Now I do understand why that
[sounds nice](/lw/i3/making_beliefs_pay_rent_in_anticipated_experiences/)
from a rationalist perspective.  Believe me, I understand.

But it seems to me that the upshot is dragging in big complicated
mathematical tools that you need to analyze real-world situations,
before the student understands what *fundamentally*goes on the
simplest cases.

It's like trying to teach programmers how to write concurrent
multithreaded programs before they know how to add two variables
together, because concurrent multithreaded programs are closer to
everyday life.  Being close to everyday life is not always a strong
recommendation for what to teach first.

Maybe the monomaniacal focus on experimental observations made
sense in the dark decades when *no one* understood what was
fundamentally going on, and you *couldn't* start there, and all
your models were just mysterious maths that gave good experimental
predictions... you can still find this view of quantum physics
presented in many books... but maybe today it's worth trying a
different angle?  The result of the standard approach is standard
confusion.

The classical world is strictly implicit in the quantum world, but
seeing from a classical perspective makes everything bigger and
more complicated.  Everyday life is a higher level of organization,
like molecules versus quarks - huge catalogue of molecules, six
quarks.  I think it is worth trying to teach from the perspective
of the quantum world first, and talking about classical
experimental results afterward.

I am not going to start with the normal classical world and then
talk about a bizarre quantum backdrop hidden behind the scenes. 
The quantum world *is* the scene and it defines normality.

I am not going to talk as if the classical world is real life, and
occasionally the classical world transmits a request for an
experimental result to a quantum-physics server, and the
quantum-physics server does some peculiar calculations and
transmits back a classical experimental result.  I am going to talk
as if the quantum world is the really real and the classical world
something far away.  Not just because that makes it easier to be a
native of a quantum universe, but because, at a core level, it's
the truth.

Finally, I am going to take a strictly realist perspective on
quantum mechanics - the quantum world is really out there, our
equations describe the territory and not our maps of it, and the
classical world only exists implicitly within the quantum one.  I
am not going to discuss non-realist views in the early stages of my
introduction, except to say why you should not be confused by
certain intuitions that non-realists draw upon for support.  I am
not going to apologize for this, and I would like to ask any
non-realists on the subject of quantum mechanics to wait and hold
their comments until called for in a later post.  Do me this favor,
please.  I think non-realism is one of the main things that
confuses prospective students, and prevents them from being able to
concretely visualize quantum phenomena.  I *will* discuss the
issues explicitly in a future post.

But everyone should be aware that, even though I'm not going to
discuss the issue at first, there is a sizable community of
scientists who dispute the realist perspective on QM.  Myself, I
don't think it's worth figuring both ways; I'm a pure realist, for
reasons that will become apparent.  But if you read my
introduction, you are getting my view.  It is not only my view.  It
is probably the majority view among theoretical physicists, if that
counts for anything (though I will argue the matter separately from
opinion polls).  Still, it is not the only view that exists in the
modern physics community.  I do not feel obliged to present the
other views *right away*, but I feel obliged to warn my readers
that there *are*other views, which I will not be presenting during
the initial stages of the introduction.

To sum up, my goal will be to teach you to think* *like
a*native of a quantum universe*, not a *reluctant tourist*.

Embrace reality.  Hug it tight.
