
# Timeless Control

People hear about
[many-worlds](/lw/q8/many_worlds_one_best_guess/), which is
deterministic, or about
[timeless physics](/lw/qp/timeless_physics/), and ask:

*If the future is determined by physics, how can anyone control it?*

In [Thou Art Physics](/lw/r0/thou_art_physics/), I pointed out that
since you are *within*physics, anything *you* control is
*necessarily* controlled by physics.  Today we will talk about a
different aspect of the confusion, the words "determined" and
"control".

The "Block Universe" is the classical term for the universe
considered from outside Time.  Even without timeless physics,
Special Relativity outlaws any global space of simultaneity, which
is widely believed to suggest the Block Universe - spacetime as one
vast 4D block.

When you take a perspective outside time, you have to be careful
not to let your old, timeful intuitions run wild in the absence of
their subject matter.

In the Block Universe, the future is not determined *before* you
make your choice.  "Before" is a timeful word.  Once you descend so
far as to start talking about *time,* then, of course, the future
comes "after" the past, not "before" it.



If we're going to take a timeless perspective, then the past and
the future have not *always* been there.  The Block Universe is not
something that hangs, motionless and static, lasting for a very
long time.  You might try to visualize the Block Universe hanging
in front of your mind's eye, but then your mind's eye is running
the clock while the universe stays still.  Nor does the Block
Universe exist for just a single second, and then disappear.  It is
not instantaneous.  It is not eternal.  It does not last for
exactly 15 seconds.  All these are timeful statements.  The Block
Universe is simply *there.*

Perhaps people imagine a Determinator - not so much an agent,
perhaps, but a mysterious entity labeled "Determinism" - which, at
"the dawn of time", say, 6:00am, writes down your choice at 7:00am,
and separately, writes the outcome at 7:02am.  In which case,
indeed, the future would be determined *before* you made your
decision...

[![Fwdeterminism\_2](/static/imported/2008/06/06/fwdeterminism_2.png "Fwdeterminism_2")](/static/imported/2008/06/06/fwdeterminism_2.png)
In this model, the Determinator writes the script for the Block
Universe at 6:00am.  And *then* time - the global time of the
universe - continues, running through the Block Universe and
realizing the script.

At 7:00am you're trying to decide to turn on the light bulb.  But
the Determinator already decided at 6:00am whether the light bulb
would be on or off at 7:02am.  Back at the dawn of time when
Destiny wrote out the Block Universe, which was scripted *before*
you started experiencing it...

This, perhaps, is the kind of unspoken, intuitive mental model that
might lead people to talk about "determinism" implying that the
future is determined *before*you make your decision.

Even without the concept of the Block Universe or timeless physics,
this is probably what goes on when people start talking about
"deterministic physics" in which "the whole course of history" was
fixed at "the dawn of time" and therefore your choices have no
effect on the "future".

As described in [Timeless Causality](/lw/qr/timeless_causality/),
"cause" and "effect" are things we talk about by pointing to
relations *within* the Block Universe.  E.g., we might expect to
see human colonies separated by an expanding cosmological horizon;
we can expect to find correlation between two regions that
communicate with a mutual point in the "past", but have no
light-lines to any mutual points in their "future".  But we
wouldn't expect to find a human colony in a distant supercluster,
having arrived from the other side of the universe; we should *not*
find correlation between regions with a shared "future" but no
shared "past".  This is how we can experimentally observe the
orientation of the Block Universe, the direction of the river that
never flows.

[![Fwcausality](/static/imported/2008/06/06/fwcausality.png "Fwcausality")](/static/imported/2008/06/06/fwcausality.png)
If you are going to talk about causality at all - and personally, I
think we should, because the universe doesn't make much sense
without it - then causality applies to relations *within* the Block
Universe, not outside it.

The Past is just *there,* and the Future is just *there,* but the
relations between them have a certain kind of structure - whose
ultimate nature, I do not conceive myself to understand - but which
we do know a bit about mathematically; the structure is called
"causality".

(I am not ruling out the possibility of causality that extends
outside the Block Universe - say, some reason why the laws of
physics are what they are.  We can have timeless causal relations,
remember?  But the causal relations between, say, "dropping a
glass" and "water spilling out", or between "deciding to do
something" and "doing it", are causal relations embedded
*within*the Block.)

One of the things we can do with graphical models of causality -
networks of little directed arrows - is construe
*counterfactuals:*  Statements about "what *would* have happened if
X had occurred, instead of Y".

These counterfactuals are untestable, unobservable, and do not
actually exist anywhere that *I've* been able to find. 
Counterfactuals are not facts, unless you count them as
mathematical properties of certain causal diagrams.  We can define
[statistical properties we expect to see, given a causal hypothesis](/lw/qr/timeless_causality/);
but counterfactuals *themselves*are not observable.  We cannot
*see* what "would have happened, if I hadn't dropped the glass".

Nonetheless, if you draw the causal graph that the statistics force
you to draw, *within* our Block Universe, and you construct the
counterfactual, then you get statements like:  "If I hadn't dropped
the glass, the water wouldn't have spilled."

If your mind contains the causal model that has "Determinism" as
the cause of both the "Past" and the "Future", then you will start
saying things like,
*But it was determined before the dawn of time that the water would spill - so not dropping the glass would have made no difference.* 
This *would* be the standard counterfactual, on the causal graph in
which "Past" and "Future" are both children of some mutual
ancestor, but have no connection between them.

And then there's the idea that, if you can predict the whole course
of the universe by looking at the state at the beginning of time,
the present must have no influence on the future...

[](/static/imported/2008/06/06/fwmarkov.png)

[![Fwmarkov\_2](/static/imported/2008/06/06/fwmarkov_2.png "Fwmarkov_2")](/static/imported/2008/06/06/fwmarkov_2.png)

Surely, if you can determine the Future just by looking at the
Past, there's no need to look at the Present?

The problem with the right-side graph is twofold:  First, it
violates the beautiful
[locality of reality](/lw/qq/timeless_beauty/); we're supposing
causal relations that go outside the immediate neighborhoods of
space/time/configuration.  And second, you can't compute the Future
from the Past, except by also computing something that looks
exactly like the Present; which computation just creates another
copy of the Block Universe (if that statement even makes any
sense), it does not affect any of the causal relations *within*
it.

One must avoid mixing up timeless and timeful thinking.  E.g.,
trying to have "Determinism" acting on things
*before they happen.*  Determinism is a timeless viewpoint, so it
doesn't mix well with words like "before".

The same thing happens if you try to talk about how the Past at
6:30am *determines* the Future at 7:30am, and therefore, the state
at 7:30am is *already determined* at 6:30am, so you can't *control*
it at 7:00am, because it was determined at 6:30am *earlier*...

What is *determined* is a timeless mathematical structure whose
interior includes 7:00am and 7:30am.  That which you might be
tempted to say "already exists" at 6:00am, does not exist *before*
7:00am, it is something whose existence *includes* the Now of
7:00am and the Now of 7:30am.

If you imagine a counterfactual surgery on the interior of the
structure at 7:00am, then, according to the statistically correct
way to draw the arrows of causality within the structure, the
7:30am part would be affected as well.

So it is exactly correct to say, on the one hand, "The whole future
course of the universe was determined by its state at 6:30am this
morning," and, on the other, "If I hadn't dropped the glass, the
water wouldn't have spilled."  In the former case you're talking
about a mathematical object outside time; in the latter case you're
talking about cause and effect *inside* the mathematical object. 
Part of *what is determined* is that dropping the glass in the Now
of 7:00:00am, *causes* the water to spill in the Now of 7:00:01am.

And as pointed out in [Thou Art Physics](/lw/r0/thou_art_physics/),
*you* are inside that mathematical object too.  So are your
thoughts, emotions, morals, goals, beliefs, and all else that goes
into the way you determine your decisions.

To say "the future is already written" is a fine example of
mixed-up timeful and timeless thinking.  The future *is.*  It is
not "already".  *What* is it that writes the future?  In the
timeless causal relations, *we do*.  *That*is *what is written*:
that our choices control the future.

But how can you "control" something without *changing* it?

"Change" is a word that makes sense *within*time, and only within
time.  One observes a macroscopically persistent object, like, say,
a lamp, and compares its state at 7:00am to its state at 7:02am. 
If the two states are different, then we say that "the lamp"
changed *over time.*

In [Timeless Physics](/lw/qp/timeless_physics/), I observed that,
while things can change *from one time to another*, a *single*
moment of time is never observed to change:

> At 7:00am, the lamp is off.  At 7:01am, I flip the switch...  At
> 7:02am, the lamp is fully bright.  Between 7:00am and 7:02am, the
> lamp changed from OFF to ON.
> 
> But have you ever seen the *future* change from one time to
> another?  Have you wandered by a lamp at exactly 7:02am, and seen
> that it is OFF; then, a bit later, looked in again on the "the lamp
> at exactly 7:02am", and discovered that it is now ON?

But if you have to change a single moment of time, in order to be
said to "control" something, you really are hosed.

Forget this whole business of deterministic physics for a moment.

Let's say there *was* some way to change a single moment of time.

We would then need some kind of meta-time *over which* time could
"change".

The lamp's state would need to change from "OFF at 7:02am at
3:00meta-am" to "ON at 7:02am at 3:01meta-am".

But wait!  Have you ever seen a lamp change from OFF at 7:02am at
3:00meta-am, to ON at 7:02am at 3:00meta-am?  No!  A single instant
of meta-time never changes, so you cannot change it, and you have
no control.

Now we need meta-meta time.

So if we're going to keep our concepts of "cause" and "control" and
"choose" - and to discard them would leave a heck of a lot
observations unexplained - then we've got to figure out some way to
define them *within* time, *within* that which is written, *within*
the Block Universe, within... well... *reality*.

Control lets you change things from one time to another; you can
turn on a lamp that was previously off.  That's one kind of
control, and a fine sort of control it is to have.  But trying to
pull this stunt on a *single* moment of time, is a type error.

If you isolate a subsystem of reality, like a rock rolling down
hill, then you can mathematically define the future-in-isolation of
that subsystem; you can take the subsystem in isolation, and
compute what would happen to it *if* you did not act on it.  In
this case, what would happen is that the rock would reach the
bottom of the hill.  This future-in-isolation is not something that
actually happens in the Block Universe; it is a computable
*property*of the subsystem as it exists at some particular moment. 
If you reach in from outside the isolation, you can stop the rock
from rolling.  Now if you walk away, and again leave the system
isolated, the future-in-isolation will be that the rock just stays
there.  But perhaps someone will reach in, and tip the rock over
and start it rolling again.  The hill is not *really* isolated -
the universe is a continuous whole - but we can imagine what
*would* happen if the hill *were* isolated.  This is a
"counterfactual", so called because they are not factual.

The future-in-isolation of a subsystem can change from one time to
another, as the subsystem itself changes over time as the result of
actions from outside.  *The*future of the Grand System that
includes *everything,*cannot change as the result of outside
action.

People want to place themselves outside the System, see themselves
separated from it by a Cartesian boundary.  But even if free will
could act outside physics to change the Block Universe, we would
just have a Grand System that included free-will+physics and
*the*future would be fully determined by *that.*  If you have
"freer will" we just have an Even Grander System, and so on.

It's hard to put yourself outside Reality.  Whatever *is,* is
real.

Control lets you *determine* single moments of time (though they do
not change from one meta-time to another).  You can change what
*would have* happened, from one time to another.  But you cannot
*change* what *does* happen - just *determine* it.  Control means
that you *are* what writes the written future, according to the
laws of causality as they exist *within*the writing.

Or maybe look at it this way:  Pretend, for a moment, that naive
views of free will were correct.  The future "doesn't exist yet"
and can be "changed".  (Note:  How are these two statements
compatible?)  Suppose that you exercise your "free will" at 6:30am
to rescue three toddlers from a burning orphanage, changing their
future from horrible flamey death at 7:00am, to happy gurgling
contentment at 7:00am.

But *now*it is 7:30am, and I say:

"Aha!  The past is fixed and can never be altered!  So now you
cannot ever have chosen any differently than you *did* choose. 
Furthermore, the actual outcome of your actions can never change
either; the outcome is now fixed, so even if your past choice did
now change, the past outcome wouldn't, because they are both just
determined by "The Past".  While your will was once free at 6:30am
to change the future at 7:00am, it is now 7:30am and this freedom
no longer exists.  So *now* your will at 6:30am is no longer free. 
How can your past will have been free, now that there is only one
past?  Therefore I do not now assign you any moral credit for
saving the orphanage; you no longer could have chosen differently
from how you chose."

In the Block Universe, the "past" and the "future" are just
perspectives, taken from some point within the Block. So, if the
fixation of the past doesn't prevent the embedded decisions from
having (had?) the property of freedom, why should the determination
of the future prevent *those*embedded decisions from having the
same property?

In the Block Universe, the Future is *just* like the Past: it
contains the Nows of people making choices that determine their
outcomes, which do not change from one meta-time to another.

And given the way we draw the causal arrows, it is correct to form
the (un-observable) counterfactuals, "If I hadn't saved those
children from the orphanage, they would be dead," and "If I don't
think carefully, my thoughts will end up in Outer Mongolia."  One
is a counterfactual over the past, and one is a counterfactual over
the future; but they are both as correct as a counter-factual can
be.

The [next step](/lw/rb/possibility_and_couldness/) in analyzing the
cognitive issues surrounding free will, is to take apart the word
"could" - as in "I *could* have decided not to save the children
from the orphanage."  As always, I encourage the reader to try to
get it in advance - this one is easier if you know a certain simple
algorithm from Artificial Intelligence.

PPS:  It all adds up to normality.
