
# Dunbar's Function

The study of eudaimonic community sizes began with a seemingly
silly method of calculation:  Robin Dunbar calculated the
correlation between the (logs of the) relative volume of the
neocortex and observed group size in primates, then extended the
graph outward to get the group size for a primate with a
human-sized neocortex.  You immediately ask, "How much of the
variance in primate group size can you explain like that, anyway?"
and the answer is
[76% of the variance among 36 primate genera](http://www.bbsonline.org/Preprints/OldArchive/bbs.dunbar.html),
which is respectable.  Dunbar came up with a group size of 148. 
Rounded to 150, and with the confidence interval of 100 to 230
tossed out the window, this became known as "Dunbar's Number".

It's probably fair to say that a literal interpretation of this
number is more or less bogus.

There was a bit more to it than that, of course.  Dunbar went
looking for corroborative evidence from studies of corporations,
hunter-gatherer tribes, and utopian communities.  Hutterite farming
communities, for example, had a rule that they must split at 150 -
with the rationale explicitly given that it was impossible to
control behavior through peer pressure beyond that point.

But 30-50 would be a typical size for a cohesive hunter-gatherer
band; 150 is more the size of a cultural lineage of related bands. 
[Life With Alacrity has an excellent series on Dunbar's Number](http://www.lifewithalacrity.com/2004/03/the_dunbar_numb.html)
which exhibits e.g. a
[histogram of Ultima Online guild sizes](http://www.lifewithalacrity.com/2005/08/dunbar_world_of.html)
- with the peak at 60, not 150.  LWA also cites further research by
PARC's
[Yee and Ducheneaut](http://blogs.parc.com/playon/archives/2005/10/guilds_max_subg.html)
showing that maximum internal cohesiveness, measured in the
interconnectedness of group members, occurs at a World of Warcraft
guild size of 50.  (Stop laughing; you can get much more detailed
data on organizational dynamics if it all happens inside a computer
server.)



And Dunbar himself did another regression and found that a
community of 150 primates would have to spend 43% of its time on
social grooming, which Dunbar interpreted as suggesting that 150
was an *upper bound* rather than an optimum, when groups were
highly incentivized to stay together.  150 people *does* sound like
a lot of employees for a tight-knit startup, doesn't it?

Also from
[Life With Alacrity](http://www.lifewithalacrity.com/2004/03/the_dunbar_numb.html):

A group of 3 is often unstable, with one person feeling left out,
or else one person controlling the others by being the "split"
vote.  A group of 4 often devolves into two pairs...  At 5 to 8
people, you can have a meeting where everyone can speak out about
what the entire group is doing, and everyone feels highly
empowered.  However, at 9 to 12 people this begins to break down --
not enough "attention" is given to everyone and meetings risk
becoming either too noisy, too boring, too long, or some
combination thereof.  
As you grow past 12 or so employees, you must start specializing
and having departments and direct reports; however, you are not
quite large enough for this to be efficient, and thus much employee
time that you put toward management tasks is wasted.  Only as you
approach and pass 25 people does having simple departments and
managers begin to work again...  
I've already noted the next chasm when you go beyond 80 people,
which I think is the point that Dunbar's Number actually marks for
a non-survival oriented group.  Even at this lower point, the noise
level created by required socialization becomes an issue, and
filtering becomes essential.  As you approach 150 this begins to be
unmanageable...

LWA suggests that community satisfaction has two peaks, one at size
\~7 for simple groups, and one at \~60 for complex groups; and that
any community has to fraction, one way or another, by the time it
approaches Dunbar's Number.

One of the primary principles of
[evolutionary psychology](/lw/l1/evolutionary_psychology/) is that
"Our modern skulls house a stone age mind"
([saith Tooby and Cosmides](http://www.psych.ucsb.edu/research/cep/primer.html)). 
You can interpret all sorts of
[angst](/lw/sc/existential_angst_factory/) as the friction of a
stone age mind rubbing against a modern world that isn't like the
hunter-gatherer environment the brain evolved to handle.

We may not *directly* interact with most of the other six billion
people in the world, but we still live in a world much larger than
Dunbar's Number.

Or to say it with appropriate generality: taking our current brain
size and mind design as the input, we live in a world much larger
than Dunbar's Function for minds of our type.

Consider some of the consequences:

If you work in a large company, you probably don't know your tribal
chief on any personal level, and may not even be able to get access
to him.  For every rule within your company, you may not know the
person who decided on that rule, and have no realistic way to talk
to them about the effects of that rule on you.  Large amounts of
the *organizational structure* of your life are beyond your ability
to control, or even talk about with the controllers; directives
that have major effects on you, may be handed down from a level you
can't reach.

If you live in a large country, you probably don't know your
President or Prime Minister on a personal level, and may not even
be able to get a few hours' chat; you live under laws and
regulations that you didn't make, and you can't talk to the people
who made them.

This is a non-ancestral condition.  Even children, while they may
live under the dictatorial rule of their parents, can at least
personally meet and talk to their tyrants. You could expect this
unnatural (that is,
non-[EEA](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Environment_of_evolutionary_adaptedness#Environment_of_evolutionary_adaptedness))
condition to create some amount of anomie.

Though it's a side issue, what's even more... interesting.... is
the way that our brains simply *haven't updated* to their
diminished power in a super-Dunbarian world.  We just go on
debating [politics](/lw/gw/politics_is_the_mindkiller/), feverishly
applying our valuable brain time to finding better ways to run the
world, with just the same fervent intensity that would be
appropriate if we were in a small tribe where we could persuade
people to change things.

If people don't like being part of large organizations and
countries, why do they stick around?  Because of another
non-ancestral condition - you can't just gather your more sensible
friends, leave the band, and gather nuts and berries somewhere
else.  If I had to cite two non-regulatory barriers at work, it
would be (a) the cost of capital equipment, and (b) the surrounding
web of contacts and contracts - a web of installed relationships
not easily duplicated by a new company.

I suspect that this is a major part of where the stereotype of
Technology as the Machine Death-Force comes from - that along with
the professional specialization and the expensive tools, you end up
in *social* structures over which you have much less control.  Some
of the fear of creating a powerful AI "even if Friendly" may come
from that stereotypical anomie - that you're creating a stronger
Machine Death-Force to regulate your life.

But we *already* live in a world, *right now,* where people are
less in control of their social destinies than they would be in a
hunter-gatherer band, because it's harder to talk to the tribal
chief or (if that fails) leave unpleasant restrictions and start
your own country.  There is an opportunity for progress here.

Another problem with our oversized world is the illusion of
increased competition.  There's that famous survey which showed
that Harvard students would rather make $50,000 if their peers were
making $25,000 than make $100,000 if their peers were receiving
$200,000 - and worse, they weren't necessarily wrong about what
would make them happy.  With a fixed income, you're unhappier at
the low end of a high-class neighborhood than the high end of a
middle-class neighborhood.

But in a "neighborhood" the size of Earth - well, you're actually
*quite unlikely* to run into either Bill Gates or Angelina Jolie on
any given day.  But the media relentlessly bombards you with
stories about the interesting people who are much richer than you
or much more attractive, as if they actually constituted a large
fraction of the world.  (This is a combination of
[biased availability](/lw/j5/availability/), and a difficulty in
[discounting](/lw/my/the_allais_paradox/)
[tiny fractions](/lw/hm/new_improved_lottery/).)

Now you could say that our hedonic relativism is one of the least
pleasant aspects of human nature.  And I might agree with you about
that.  But I tend to think that deep changes of brain design and
emotional architecture should be taken slowly, and so it makes
sense to look at the environment too.

If you lived in a world the size of a hunter-gatherer band, then it
would be easier to find something *important* at which to be the
best - or do something that genuinely struck you as important,
without becoming lost in a vast crowd of others with similar
ideas.

The eudaimonic size of a community as a function of the component
minds' intelligence might be given by the degree to which those
minds find it natural to specialize - the number of different
professions that you can excel at, without having to invent
professions *just* to excel at.  Being the best at Go is one thing,
if many people know about Go and play it.  Being the best at
"playing tennis using a football" is easier to achieve, but it also
seems a tad... artificial.

Call a specialization "natural" if it will arise without an
oversupply of potential entrants.  Newton could specialize in
"physics", but today it would not be *possible* to specialize in
"physics" - even if you were the only potential physicist in the
world, you couldn't achieve expertise in all the physics known to
modern-day humanity.  You'd have to pick, say, quantum field
theory, or some particular approach to QFT.  But not QFT over
left-handed bibble-braids with cherries on top; that's what happens
when there are a thousand other workers in your field and everyone
is desperate for some way to differentiate themselves.

When you look at it that way, then there must be much more than 50
natural specializations in the modern world - but still much less
than six billion.  By the same logic as the original Dunbar's
Number, if there are so many different professional specialties
that no one person has *heard* of them all, then you won't know
*who*to consult about any given topic.

But if people keep getting smarter and learning more - expanding
the number of relationships they can track, maintaining them more
efficiently - and naturally specializing further as more knowledge
is discovered and we become able to conceptualize more complex
areas of study - and if the population growth rate stays under the
rate of increase of Dunbar's Function - then eventually there could
be a single community of sentients, and it really would be a single
community.
