
# Bind Yourself to Reality

So perhaps you're reading all this, and asking:  "Yes, but what
does this have to do with [reductionism](/lw/on/reductionism/)?"

Partially, it's a matter of
[leaving a line of retreat](/lw/o4/leave_a_line_of_retreat/).  It's
not easy to take something *important* apart into components, when
you're convinced that this removes magic from the world, unweaves
the rainbow.  I do plan to take certain things apart, on this blog;
and I prefer not to create pointless existential anguish.

Partially, it's the crusade against Hollywood Rationality, the
concept that understanding the rainbow subtracts its beauty.  The
rainbow is still beautiful *plus* you get the beauty of physics.

But even more deeply, it's one of these subtle
[hidden-core-of-rationality](http://yudkowsky.net/virtues/)
things.  You know, the sort of thing where I start talking about
'[the Way](/lw/m7/zen_and_the_art_of_rationality/)'.  It's about
*binding yourself to reality.*

In one of Frank Herbert's *Dune* books, IIRC, it is said that a
Truthsayer gains their ability to detect lies in others by always
speaking truth themselves, so that they form a relationship with
the truth whose violation they can feel.  It wouldn't work, but I
still think it's one of the more beautiful thoughts in fiction.  At
the very least, to get close to the truth, you have to be willing
to press yourself up against reality as tightly as possible,
without flinching away, or sneering down.

You can see the bind-yourself-to-reality theme in
"[Lotteries:  A Waste of Hope](/lw/hl/lotteries_a_waste_of_hope/)." 
Understanding that lottery tickets have negative expected utility,
does not mean that you give up the hope of being rich.  It means
that you stop wasting that hope on lottery tickets.  You put the
hope into your job, your school, your startup, your eBay sideline;
and if you truly have nothing worth hoping for, then maybe it's
time to start looking.

It's not dreams I object to, only *impossible* dreams.  The lottery
isn't impossible, but it is an un-actionable near-impossibility. 
It's not that winning the lottery is extremely *difficult* -
requires a desperate effort - but that *work*isn't the issue.

I say all this, to exemplify the idea of taking emotional energy
that is flowing off to nowhere, and binding it into the realms of
reality.

This doesn't mean setting goals that are low enough to be
"realistic", i.e., easy and safe and parentally approved.  Maybe
this is good advice in your personal case, I don't know, but I'm
not the one to say it.

What I mean is that you can invest emotional energy in rainbows
even if they turn out *not* to be magic. 
[The future is always absurd](/lw/j6/why_is_the_future_so_absurd/)
but it is never *unreal.*

The Hollywood Rationality stereotype is that "rational =
emotionless"; the more reasonable you are, the more of your
emotions Reason inevitably destroys.  In
"[Feeling Rational](/lw/hp/feeling_rational/)" I contrast this
against *"That which can be destroyed by the truth should be"* and
*"That which the truth nourishes should thrive".*  When you have
arrived at your best picture of the truth, there is nothing
irrational about the emotions you feel as a result of that - the
emotions cannot be destroyed by truth, so they must not be
irrational.

So instead of *destroying* emotional energies associated with bad
explanations for rainbows, as the Hollywood Rationality stereotype
would have it, let us *redirect* these emotional energies into
reality - bind them to beliefs that are as true as we can make
them.

Want to fly?  Don't give up on flight.  Give up on flying potions
and build yourself an airplane.

Remember the theme of
"[Think Like Reality](/lw/hs/think_like_reality/)", where I talked
about how when physics seems counterintuitive, you've got to accept
that it's not *physics* that's weird, it's *you*?

What I'm talking about now is like that, only with
[emotions](/lw/hp/feeling_rational/) instead of hypotheses -
binding your feelings into the real world.  Not the "realistic"
everyday world.  I would be a howling hypocrite if I told you to
shut up and do your homework.  I mean the *real* real world, the
[lawful universe](/lw/hr/universal_law/), that includes
[absurdities](/lw/j6/why_is_the_future_so_absurd/) like Moon
landings and the evolution of human intelligence.  Just not any
magic, anywhere, ever*.*

It is a Hollywood Rationality meme that "Science takes the fun out
of life."

Science puts the fun back *into* life.

Rationality directs your emotional energies into the universe,
rather than somewhere else.
