
# Brain Breakthrough! It's Made of Neurons!

[amazing breakthrough](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/03/amazing-breakth.html),
a multinational team of scientists led by Nobel laureate Santiago
Ramon y Cajal announced that the brain is composed of a
*ridiculously* complicated network of tiny cells connected to each
other by infinitesimal threads and branches.

The multinational team - which also includes the famous technician
Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, and possibly Imhotep, promoted to the
Egyptian god of medicine - issued this statement:

"The present discovery culminates years of research indicating that
the convoluted squishy thing inside our skulls is even more
complicated than it looks.  Thanks to Cajal's application of a new
staining technique invented by Camillo Golgi, we have learned that
this structure is not a continuous network like the blood vessels
of the body, but is actually composed of many tiny cells, or
"neurons", connected to one another by even more tiny filaments.

"Other extensive evidence, beginning from Greek medical researcher
Alcmaeon and continuing through Paul Broca's research on speech
deficits, indicates that the brain is the seat of reason.

"Nemesius, the Bishop of Emesia, has previously argued that brain
tissue is too earthy to act as an intermediary between the body and
soul, and so the mental faculties are located in the ventricles of
the brain.  However, if this is correct, there is no reason why
this organ should turn out to have an immensely complicated
internal composition.

"Charles Babbage has independently suggested that many small
mechanical devices could be collected into an 'Analytical Engine',
capable of performing activities, such as arithmetic, which are
widely believed to require thought.  The work of Luigi Galvani and
Hermann von Helmholtz suggests that the activities of neurons are
electrochemical in nature, rather than mechanical pressures as
previously believed.  Nonetheless, we think an analogy with
Babbage's 'Analytical Engine' suggests that a vastly complicated
network of neurons could similarly exhibit thoughtful properties.

"We have found an enormously complicated material system located
where the mind should be.  The implications are shocking, and must
be squarely faced.  We believe that the present research offers
strong experimental evidence that Benedictus Spinoza was correct,
and Rene Descartes wrong:  Mind and body are of one substance.

"In combination with the work of Charles Darwin showing how such a
complicated organ could, in principle, have arisen as the result of
processes not themselves intelligent, the bulk of scientific
evidence now seems to indicate that intelligence is ontologically
non-fundamental and has an extended origin in time.  This strongly
weighs against theories which assign mental entities an
ontologically fundamental or causally primal status, including all
religions ever invented.

"Much work remains to be done on discovering the specific
identities between electrochemical interactions between neurons,
and thoughts.  Nonetheless, we believe our discovery offers the
promise, though not yet the realization, of a full scientific
account of thought.  The problem may now be declared, if not
solved, then solvable."

We regret that Cajal and most of the other researchers involved on
the Project are no longer available for comment.
