
# Excluding the Supernatural

Occasionally, you hear someone claiming that creationism should not
be taught in schools, especially not as a competing hypothesis to
evolution, because creationism is *a priori and automatically*
excluded from scientific consideration, in that it invokes the
"supernatural".

So... is the idea here, that creationism *could* be true, but
*even if it were true*, you wouldn't be *allowed* to teach it in
science class, because science is only about "natural" things?

It seems clear enough that this notion stems from the desire to
[avoid a confrontation between science and religion](/lw/i8/religions_claim_to_be_nondisprovable/). 
You don't want to come right out and say that science doesn't teach
Religious Claim X because X has been
[tested by the scientific method and found false](/lw/i8/religions_claim_to_be_nondisprovable/). 
So instead, you can... um... claim that science is excluding
hypothesis X *a priori*.  That way you don't have to discuss how
experiment has falsified X *a posteriori.*

Of course this plays right into the creationist claim that
Intelligent Design isn't getting a fair shake from science - that
science has *prejudged* the issue in favor of atheism, regardless
of the evidence.  If science excluded Intelligent Design
*a priori,* this would be a justified complaint!

But let's back up a moment.  The one comes to you and says: 
"Intelligent Design is excluded from being science *a priori,*
because it is 'supernatural', and science only deals in 'natural'
explanations."

What exactly do they mean, "supernatural"?  Is any explanation
invented by someone with the last name "Cohen" a supernatural one? 
If we're going to summarily kick a set of hypotheses out of
science, what is it that we're supposed to exclude?

By *far* the best definition I've ever heard of the supernatural is
[Richard Carrier's](http://richardcarrier.blogspot.com/2007/01/defining-supernatural.html): 
A "supernatural" explanation appeals to
*ontologically basic mental things,* mental entities that cannot be
reduced to nonmental entities.



This is the difference, for example, between saying that
[water rolls downhill because it *wants* to be lower](/lw/te/three_fallacies_of_teleology/),
and setting forth differential equations that claim to describe
only motions, not desires.  It's the difference between saying that
a tree puts forth leaves because of a tree spirit, versus examining
plant biochemistry.  Cognitive science
[takes the fight against supernaturalism into the realm of the mind](/lw/tf/dreams_of_ai_design/).

Why is this an excellent definition of the supernatural?  I refer
you to
[Richard Carrier](http://richardcarrier.blogspot.com/2007/01/defining-supernatural.html)
for the full argument.  But consider:  Suppose that you discover
what seems to be a *spirit,* inhabiting a tree: a dryad who can
materialize outside or inside the tree, who speaks in English about
the need to protect her tree, et cetera.  And then suppose that we
turn a microscope on this tree spirit, and she turns out to be
[made of parts](/lw/t5/when_anthropomorphism_became_stupid/) - not
inherently spiritual and ineffable parts, like fabric of desireness
and cloth of belief; but rather the same sort of parts as quarks
and electrons, parts whose behavior is defined in motions rather
than minds.  Wouldn't the dryad immediately be
[demoted to the dull catalogue of common things](/lw/or/joy_in_the_merely_real/)?

But if we accept Richard Carrier's definition of the supernatural,
then a dilemma arises: we *want* to give religious claims a fair
shake, but it seems that we have *very good* grounds for excluding
supernatural explanations *a priori.*

I mean, what *would* the universe look like if reductionism were
false?

I previously
[defined the reductionist thesis](/lw/on/reductionism/) as follows:
human minds create multi-level *models* of reality in which
high-level patterns and low-level patterns are separately and
explicitly *represented.*  A physicist knows Newton's equation for
gravity, Einstein's equation for gravity, and the derivation of the
former as a low-speed approximation of the latter.  But these three
separate mental representations, are only a convenience of human
cognition.  It is not that *reality itself* has an Einstein
equation that governs at high speeds, a Newton equation that
governs at low speeds, and a "bridging law" that smooths the
interface.  Reality itself has only a single level, Einsteinian
gravity.  It is only the
[Mind Projection Fallacy](/lw/oi/mind_projection_fallacy/) that
makes some people talk as if the higher levels could have a
separate existence - different levels of organization can have
separate representations in human maps, but the territory itself is
a single unified low-level mathematical object.

Suppose this were wrong.

Suppose that the
[Mind Projection Fallacy](/lw/oi/mind_projection_fallacy/) was not
a fallacy, but simply true.

Suppose that a 747 had a fundamental physical existence apart from
the quarks making up the 747.

What experimental observations would you expect to make, if you
found yourself in such a universe?

If you can't come up with a good answer to that, it's not
*observation* that's ruling out "non-reductionist" beliefs, but
*a priori* logical incoherence.  If you can't say what predictions
the "non-reductionist" model makes, how can you say that
experimental evidence rules it out?

My thesis is that non-reductionism is a *confusion;* and once you
realize that an idea is a confusion, it becomes a tad difficult to
envision what the universe would look like if the confusion were
*true. *Maybe I've got some multi-level model of the world, and the
multi-level model has a one-to-one direct correspondence with the
causal elements of the physics?  But once all the rules are
specified, why wouldn't the model just flatten out into yet another
list of fundamental things and their interactions?  Does everything
I can *see in* the model, like a 747 or a human mind, have to
become a separate real thing?  But what if I see a pattern in that
new supersystem?

Supernaturalism is a special case of non-reductionism, where it is
not 747s that are irreducible, but just (some) mental things. 
Religion is a special case of supernaturalism, where the
irreducible mental things are God(s) and souls; and perhaps also
sins, angels, karma, etc.

If I propose the existence of a powerful entity with the ability to
survey and alter each element of our observed universe, but with
the entity reducible to nonmental parts that interact with the
elements of our universe in a lawful way; if I propose that this
entity wants certain particular things, but "wants" using a brain
composed of particles and fields; then this is not yet a religion,
just a naturalistic hypothesis about a naturalistic Matrix.  If
tomorrow the clouds parted and a vast glowing amorphous figure
thundered forth the above description of reality, then this would
not imply that the figure was necessarily honest; but I would show
the movies in a science class, and I would try to derive testable
predictions from the theory.

Conversely, [religions have ignored](/lw/kr/an_alien_god/) the
discovery of that [ancient bodiless thing](/lw/kr/an_alien_god/):
omnipresent in the working of Nature and immanent in every falling
leaf: vast as a planet's surface and billions of years old: itself
unmade and arising from the structure of physics: designing without
brain to shape all life on Earth and the minds of humanity. 
Natural selection, when Darwin proposed it, was not hailed as the
long-awaited Creator:  It wasn't *fundamentally* mental.

But now we get to the dilemma: if the staid conventional normal
boring understanding of physics and the brain *is* correct, there's
no way *in principle* that a human being can concretely envision,
and derive testable experimental predictions about, an alternate
universe in which things *are* irreducibly mental.  Because, if the
boring old normal model is correct, your brain is made of quarks,
and so your brain will only be able to envision and concretely
predict things that can predicted by quarks.  You will only ever be
able to construct models made of interacting simple things.

People who live in reductionist universes cannot concretely
envision non-reductionist universes.  They can
[pronounce the syllables](/lw/i6/professing_and_cheering/)
"non-reductionist" but they can't *imagine* it.

The basic error of anthropomorphism, and the reason why
[supernatural explanations sound much simpler than they really are](/lw/jp/occams_razor/),
is your brain using itself as an opaque black box to predict other
things labeled "mindful".  Because you already have big,
complicated webs of neural circuitry that implement your "wanting"
things, it seems like you can easily describe water that "wants" to
flow downhill - the one word "want" acts as a
[lever](/lw/sp/detached_lever_fallacy/) to set your *own*
complicated wanting-machinery in motion.

Or you imagine that God likes beautiful things, and therefore made
the flowers.  Your own "beauty" circuitry determines what is
"beautiful" and "not beautiful".  But you don't know the diagram of
your own synapses.  You can't describe a *nonmental* system that
computes the same label for what is "beautiful" or "not beautiful"
- can't write a computer program that predicts your own labelings. 
But this is just a defect of knowledge on your part; it doesn't
mean that the brain
[has no explanation](/lw/iu/mysterious_answers_to_mysterious_questions/).

If the "boring view" of reality is correct, then you can *never*
predict anything irreducible because *you* are reducible.  You can
never get Bayesian confirmation for a hypothesis of irreducibility,
because any *prediction you can make* is, therefore, something that
could also be predicted by a reducible thing, namely your brain.

Some boxes you really *can't* think outside.  If our universe
*really is* Turing computable, we will never be able to
*concretely* envision anything that isn't Turing-computable - no
matter how many levels of halting oracle hierarchy our
mathematicians can talk *about,* we won't be able to predict what a
halting oracle would actually *say,* in such fashion as to
experimentally discriminate it from merely computable reasoning.

Of course, that's all assuming the "boring view" is correct. 
*To the extent* that you believe evolution is true, you should not
expect to encounter strong evidence against evolution.  To the
extent you believe reductionism is true, you should expect
non-reductionist hypotheses to be *incoherent* as well as wrong. 
To the extent you believe supernaturalism is false, you should
expect it to be *inconceivable* as well.

If, on the other hand, a supernatural hypothesis turns out to be
true, then presumably you will also discover that it is not
inconceivable.

So let us bring this back full circle to the matter of Intelligent
Design:

Should ID be excluded *a priori* from experimental falsification
and science classrooms, because, by invoking the supernatural, it
has placed itself outside of natural philosophy?

I answer:  "Of course not."  The *irreducibility* of the
intelligent designer is not an indispensable part of the ID
hypothesis.  For every irreducible God that can be proposed by the
IDers, there exists a corresponding reducible alien that behaves in
accordance with the same predictions - since the IDers themselves
are reducible; to the extent I believe reductionism is in fact
correct, which is a rather strong extent, I must expect to discover
reducible formulations of all supposedly supernatural predictive
models.

If we're going over the archeological records to test the assertion
that Jehovah parted the Red Sea out of an explicit desire to
display its superhuman power, then it makes little difference
whether Jehovah is ontologically basic, or an alien with nanotech,
or a Dark Lord of the Matrix.  You do some archeology, find no
skeletal remnants or armor at the Red Sea site, and indeed find
records that Egypt ruled much of Canaan at the time.  So you stamp
the historical record in the Bible "disproven" and carry on.  The
hypothesis is coherent, falsifiable and wrong.

Likewise with the evidence from biology that foxes are designed to
chase rabbits, rabbits are designed to evade foxes, and
[neither is designed "to carry on their species" or "protect the harmony of Nature"](/lw/l5/evolving_to_extinction/);
likewise with the retina being designed backwards with the
light-sensitive parts at the bottom; and so on through a thousand
other items of evidence for splintered, immoral,
[incompetent](/lw/kt/evolutions_are_stupid_but_work_anyway/)
design.  The Jehovah model of our [alien god](/lw/kr/an_alien_god/)
is coherent, falsifiable, and wrong - coherent, that is, so long as
you don't care whether Jehovah is ontologically basic or just an
alien.

Just convert the supernatural hypothesis into the corresponding
natural hypothesis.  Just make the same predictions the same way,
without asserting any mental things to be ontologically basic. 
Consult your brain's black box if necessary to make predictions -
say, if you want to talk about an "angry god" without building a
full-fledged angry AI to label behaviors as angry or not angry.  So
you derive the predictions, or look up the predictions made by
ancient theologians without advance knowledge of our experimental
results.  If experiment conflicts with those predictions, then it
is fair to speak of the religious claim having been scientifically
refuted.  It was given its just chance at confirmation; it is being
excluded *a posteriori,* not *a priori.*

Ultimately, reductionism is just disbelief in
*fundamentally complicated* things.  If "fundamentally complicated"
sounds like an oxymoron... well, that's why I think that the
doctrine of non-reductionism is a *confusion,* rather than a way
that things could be, but aren't.  You would be wise to be wary, if
you find yourself supposing such things.

But the ultimate rule of science is to look and see.  If ever a God
appeared to thunder upon the mountains, it would be something that
people looked at and saw.

*Corollary:*  Any supposed [designer](/lw/tf/dreams_of_ai_design/)
of Artificial General Intelligence who
[talks about religious beliefs in respectful tones](/lw/gv/outside_the_laboratory/),
is clearly not an
[expert on](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/04/expert_at_versu.html)
reducing mental things to nonmental things; and indeed knows so
very little of the uttermost basics, as for it to be scarcely
plausible that they could be
[expert at](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/04/expert_at_versu.html)
the art; unless their *idiot savancy* is complete.  Or, of course,
if they're outright lying.  We're not talking about a subtle
mistake.
