
# Fake Reductionism

> There was an awful rainbow once in heaven:  
> We know her woof, her texture; she is given  
> In the dull catalogue of common things.  
>         -- John Keats, *Lamia*  

I am guessing - though it is only a guess - that Keats himself did
*not* know the woof and texture of the rainbow.  Not the way that
Newton understood rainbows.  Perhaps not even at all.  Maybe Keats
just read, somewhere, that Newton had explained the rainbow as
"light reflected from raindrops" -

- which was actually known in the 13th century.  Newton only added
a refinement by showing that the light was decomposed into colored
parts, rather than transformed in color.  But that put rainbows
back in the news headlines.  And so Keats, with Charles Lamb and
William Wordsworth and Benjamin Haydon, drank "Confusion to the
memory of Newton" because "he destroyed the poetry of the rainbow
by reducing it to a prism." That's one reason to suspect Keats
didn't understand the subject too deeply.

I am guessing, though it is only a guess, that Keats could *not*
have sketched out on paper why rainbows only appear when the Sun is
behind your head, or why the rainbow is an arc of a circle.

If so, Keats had a [Fake Explanation](/lw/ip/fake_explanations/). 
In this case, a *fake reduction*.  He'd been *told that* the
rainbow had been reduced, but it had not actually *been reduced* in
his model of the world.

This is another of those distinctions that anti-reductionists fail
to get - the difference between
[professing](/lw/i4/belief_in_belief/) the flat fact that something
is reducible, and *seeing* it.

In this, the anti-reductionists are not too greatly to be blamed,
for it is part of a general problem.

I've written before on
[seeming knowledge that is not knowledge](/lw/ip/fake_explanations/),
and beliefs that are not *about* their supposed objects but only
[recordings to recite back in the classroom](/lw/iq/guessing_the_teachers_password/),
and words that operate as
[stop signs for curiosity](/lw/it/semantic_stopsigns/) rather than
answers, and technobabble which only conveys membership in the
[literary genre of "science"](/lw/ir/science_as_attire/)...

There is a very great distinction between being able to *see* where
the rainbow comes from, and playing around with prisms to confirm
it, and maybe making a rainbow yourself by spraying water droplets
-

- versus some dour-faced philosopher just *telling* you, "No,
there's nothing special about the rainbow.  Didn't you hear?
Scientists have explained it away.  Just something to do with
raindrops or whatever.  Nothing to be excited about."

I think this distinction probably accounts for a hell of a lot of
the deadly existential emptiness that supposedly accompanies
scientific reductionism.

You have to interpret the anti-reductionists' experience of
"reductionism", not in terms of their*actually seeing* how rainbows
work, not in terms of their having the critical "Aha!", but in
terms of their being told that the
[password](/lw/iq/guessing_the_teachers_password/) is "Science". 
The effect is just to move rainbows to a different *literary genre*
- a [literary genre](/lw/ir/science_as_attire/) they have been
[taught](/lw/k5/cached_thoughts/) to regard as
[boring](/lw/j3/science_as_curiositystopper/).

For them, the effect of hearing "Science has explained rainbows!"
is to hang up a sign over rainbows saying, "This phenomenon has
been labeled BORING by order of the Council of Sophisticated
Literary Critics.  Move along."

And that's all the sign says: only that, and nothing more.

So the literary critics have their gnomes yanked out by force; not
dissolved in insight, but removed by flat order of authority.  They
are given no beauty to replace the hauntless air, no genuine
understanding that could be interesting in its own right.  Just a
label saying, "Ha!  You thought rainbows were pretty?  You poor,
unsophisticated fool.  This is part of the literary genre of
science, of dry and solemn incomprehensible words."

That's how anti-reductionists experience "reductionism".

Well, can't blame Keats, poor lad probably wasn't raised right.

But he dared to drink "Confusion to the memory of Newton"?* *

I propose "To the memory of Keats's confusion" as a toast for
rationalists.  Cheers.
