
# Hand vs Fingers

Back to our original topic:  [Reductionism](/lw/on/reductionism/),
which (in case you've forgotten) is part of a sequence on the
[Mind Projection Fallacy](/lw/oi/mind_projection_fallacy/).  There
can be emotional problems in accepting reductionism, if you think
that things have to be fundamental to be fun.  But this position
commits us to never [taking joy](/lw/or/joy_in_the_merely_real/) in
anything more complicated than a quark, and so I prefer to reject
it.

To review, the reductionist thesis is that we use multi-level
models for computational reasons, but physical reality has only a
single level.  If this doesn't sound familiar, please reread
"[Reductionism](/lw/on/reductionism/)".


* * * * *

Today I'd like to pose the following conundrum:  When you pick up a
cup of water, is it your *hand* that picks it up?

Most people, of course, go with the naive popular answer:  "Yes."

Recently, however, scientists have made a stunning discovery:  It's
not your *hand* that holds the cup, it's actually your fingers,
thumb, and palm.

Yes, I know!  I was shocked too.  But it seems that after
scientists measured the forces exerted on the cup by each of your
fingers, your thumb, and your palm, they found there was no force
left over - so the force exerted by your *hand* must be zero.

The theme here is that, if you can *see how* (not just *know that*)
a higher level reduces to a lower one, they will not seem like
separate things within your map; you will be able to *see* how
silly it is to think that your fingers could be in one place, and
your hand somewhere else; you will be able to *see* how silly it is
to argue about whether it is your hand picks up the cup, or your
fingers.

The operative word is "see", as in concrete visualization. 
Imagining your hand causes you to imagine the fingers and thumb and
palm; conversely, imagining fingers and thumb and palm causes you
to identify a hand in the mental picture.  Thus the high level
*of your map* and the low level *of your map* will be tightly bound
together *in your mind*.

In reality, of course, the levels are bound together even tighter
than that - bound together by the tightest possible binding:
physical identity.  You can *see* this:  You can *see* that saying
(1) "hand" or (2) "fingers and thumb and palm", does not refer to
different *things,* but different *points of view*.

But suppose you lack the knowledge to so tightly bind together the
levels of your map.  For example, you could have a "hand scanner"
that showed a "hand" as a dot on a map (like an old-fashioned radar
display), and similar scanners for fingers/thumbs/palms; then you
would see a cluster of dots around the hand, but you would be able
to *imagine* the hand-dot moving off from the others.  So, even
though the physical reality of the hand (that is, the thing the dot
corresponds to) was identical with / strictly composed of the
physical realities of the fingers and thumb and palm, you would not
be able to see this fact; even if someone told you, or you guessed
from the correspondence of the dots, you would only *know* the fact
of reduction, not *see* it.  You would still be able to *imagine*
the hand dot moving around independently, even though, if the
physical makeup of the sensors were held constant, it would be
physically impossible for this to actually happen.

Or, at a still lower level of binding, people might just tell you
"There's a hand over there, and some fingers over there" - in which
case you would know little more than a Good-Old-Fashioned AI
representing the situation using suggestively named LISP tokens. 
There wouldn't be anything *obviously* contradictory about
asserting:

> `|- Inside(Room,Hand)<br>|- ~Inside(Room,Fingers)`

because you would not possess the *knowledge*

> `|- Inside(x, Hand) -> Inside(x,Fingers)`

None of this says that a hand can actually detach its existence
from your fingers and crawl, ghostlike, across the room; it just
says that a Good-Old-Fashioned AI with a propositional
representation may not *know* any better.  The map is not the
territory.

In particular, you shouldn't draw too many conclusions from how it
seems *conceptually possible,* in the mind of some specific
conceiver, to separate the hand from its constituent elements of
fingers, thumb, and palm.  Conceptual possibility is not the same
as logical possibility or physical possibility.

It is *conceptually* possible *to you* that 235757 is prime,
because you don't know any better.  But it isn't *logically*
possible that 235757 is prime; if you were logically omniscient,
235757 would be obviously composite (and you would know the
factors).  That that's why we have the notion of impossible
possible worlds, so that we can put probability distributions on
propositions that may or may not be
[*in fact*](/lw/om/qualitatively_confused/) logically impossible.

And you can imagine philosophers who criticize "eliminative
fingerists" who contradict the direct facts of experience - we can
*feel* our hand holding the cup, after all - by suggesting that
"hands" *don't really exist,* in which case, obviously, the cup
would fall down.  And philosophers who suggest "appendigital
bridging laws" to explain how a particular configuration of
fingers, evokes a hand into existence - with the note, of course,
that while our world contains those particular appendigital
bridging laws, the laws could have been conceivably different, and
so are not in any sense *necessary facts,* etc.

All of these are cases of Mind Projection Fallacy, and what I call
"naive philosophical realism" - the confusion of philosophical
intuitions for direct, veridical information about reality.  Your
inability to imagine something is just a computational fact about
what your brain can or can't imagine.  Another brain might work
differently.
