
# Is Humanism a Religion-Substitute?

For many years before the Wright Brothers, people dreamed of flying
with magic potions.  There was
[nothing irrational](/lw/ot/bind_yourself_to_reality/) about the
*raw desire* to fly.  There was nothing *tainted* about the wish to
look down on a cloud from above.  Only the "magic potions" part was
irrational.

Suppose you were to put me into an fMRI scanner, and take a movie
of my brain's activity levels, while I watched a space shuttle
launch.  (Wanting to visit space is not "realistic", but it is an
essentially lawful dream - one that can be fulfilled in a lawful
universe.)  The fMRI might - maybe, maybe not - resemble the fMRI
of a devout Christian watching a nativity scene.

Should an experimenter obtain this result, there's a lot of people
out there, both Christians and some atheists, who would gloat: 
"Ha, ha, space travel is your
[religion](/lw/lo/uncritical_supercriticality/)!"

But that's drawing the wrong
[category](/lw/o2/mutual_information_and_density_in_thingspace/)
[boundary](/lw/o3/superexponential_conceptspace_and_simple_words/). 
It's like saying that, because some people once tried to fly by
irrational means, no one should ever enjoy looking out of an
airplane window on the clouds below.

If a rocket launch is what it takes to give me a feeling of
aesthetic transcendence, I do not see this as a *substitute*for
religion.  That is theomorphism - the viewpoint from gloating
religionists who assume that everyone who *isn't* religious has a
hole in their mind that wants filling.

Now, to be fair to the religionists, this is not *just*a gloating
assumption.  There *are* atheists who have religion-shaped holes in
their minds.  I *have*seen attempts to substitute atheism or even
transhumanism for religion.  And the result is invariably awful. 
Utterly awful.  Absolutely abjectly awful.

I call such efforts, "hymns to the nonexistence of God".

When someone sets out to write an atheistic hymn - "Hail, oh
unintelligent universe," blah, blah, blah - the result will,
without exception, suck.

Why?  Because they're being [imitative.](/lw/k5/cached_thoughts/) 
Because they have no motivation for writing the hymn *except* a
vague feeling that since churches have hymns, they ought to have
one too.  And, on a purely artistic level, that puts them far
beneath genuine religious art that is not an imitation of anything,
but an original expression of emotion.

Religious hymns were (often) written by people who *felt strongly*
and*wrote honestly* and put serious effort into the prosody and
imagery of their work - that's what gives their work the grace that
it possesses, of artistic integrity.

So are atheists doomed to hymnlessness?

There is an acid test of attempts at post-theism.  The acid test
is:  "If religion had never existed among the human species - if we
had *never made* the original mistake - would this song, this art,
this ritual, this way of thinking, still make sense?"

If humanity had never made the original mistake, there would be no
hymns to the nonexistence of God.  But there would still be
marriages, so the notion of an atheistic marriage ceremony makes
perfect sense - as long as you don't suddenly launch into a lecture
on how God doesn't exist.  Because, in a world where religion
*never had* existed, nobody would interrupt a wedding to talk about
the implausibility of a distant hypothetical concept.  They'd talk
about love, children, commitment, honesty, devotion, but who the
heck would mention God?

And, in a human world where religion *never had* existed, there
would still be people who got tears in their eyes watching a space
shuttle launch.

Which is why, even if experiment shows that watching a shuttle
launch makes "religion"-associated areas of my brain light up,
associated with feelings of transcendence, I do not see that as a
*substitute* for religion; I expect the same brain areas would
light up, for the same reason, if I lived in a world where religion
had never been invented.

A good "atheistic hymn" is simply a song about anything worth
singing about that doesn't happen to be religious.

Also,
[reversed stupidity is not intelligence](/lw/lw/reversed_stupidity_is_not_intelligence/). 
The world's greatest idiot may say the Sun is shining, but that
doesn't make it dark out.  The point is *not* to create a life that
resembles religion as little as possible in every surface aspect -
this is the same kind of thinking that inspires hymns to the
nonexistence of God.  If humanity had never made the original
mistake, no one would be *trying to avoid* things that vaguely
resembled religion.  Believe accurately, then
[feel accordingly](/lw/hp/feeling_rational/):  If space launches
actually exist, and watching a rocket rise makes you want to sing,
then write the song, dammit.

If I get tears in my eyes at a space shuttle launch, it doesn't
mean I'm trying to fill a hole left by religion - it means that my
emotional energies, my *caring,* are
[bound into the real world](/lw/ot/bind_yourself_to_reality/).

If God did speak plainly, and answer prayers reliably, God would
just become one more boringly real thing,
[no more worth believing in than the postman](/lw/ou/if_you_demand_magic_magic_wont_help/). 
If God were real, it would destroy the inner uncertainty that
brings forth outward fervor in compensation.  And if everyone else
believed God were real, it would destroy the specialness of being
one of the elect.

If you invest your emotional energy in space travel, you don't have
those vulnerabilities.  I can *see* the Space Shuttle rise without
losing the awe.  Everyone else can believe that Space Shuttles are
real, and it doesn't make them any less special.  I haven't painted
myself into the corner.

The choice between God and humanity is not just a choice of drugs. 
Above all, humanity *actually exists.** *
