
# Joy in Discovery

> "Newton was the greatest genius who ever lived, and the most
> fortunate; for we cannot find more than once a system of the world
> to establish."  
>         -- Lagrange

I have more fun discovering things for myself than reading about
them in textbooks.  This is right and proper, and only to be
expected.

But discovering something that *no one else knows* - being the
*first* to unravel the secret -

There is a story that one of the first men to realize that stars
were burning by fusion - plausible attributions I've seen are to
[Fritz Houtermans](http://ask.metafilter.com/54496/Feynman-Quote-Demystification)
and
[Hans Bethe](http://www.dykestowatchoutfor.com/more-on-consciousness#comment-72828)
- was walking out with his girlfriend of a night, and she made a
comment on how beautiful the stars were, and he replied:  "Yes, and
right now, I'm the only man in the world who knows why they
shine."

It is attested by numerous sources that this experience, being the
first person to solve a major mystery, is a *tremendous* high. 
It's probably the closest experience you can get to taking drugs,
without taking drugs - though I wouldn't know.

*That* can't be healthy.

Not that I'm objecting to the euphoria.  It's the exclusivity
clause that bothers me.  Why should a discovery be worth *less,*
just because someone *else* already knows the answer?

The most charitable interpretation I can put on the psychology, is
that you don't struggle with a single problem for months or years
if it's something you can just look up in the library.  And that
the tremendous high comes from having hit the problem from every
angle you can manage, and having bounced; and then having analyzed
the problem again, using every idea you can think of, and all the
data you can get your hands on - making progress a little at a time
- so that when, *finally,* you crack through the problem, all the
dangling pieces and unresolved questions fall into place at once,
like solving a dozen locked-room murder mysteries with a single
clue.

And more, the understanding you get is *real* understanding -
understanding that embraces all the clues you studied to solve the
problem, when you didn't yet know the answer.  Understanding that
comes from asking questions day after day and worrying at them;
understanding that no one else can get (no matter how much you tell
them the answer) unless they spend months studying the problem in
its historical context, even after it's been solved - and even
then, they won't get the high of solving it all at once.

That's one possible reason why James Clerk Maxwell might have had
more fun *discovering* Maxwell's Equations, than you had fun
reading about them.

A slightly less charitable reading is that the tremendous high
comes from what is termed, in the *politesse* of social psychology,
"commitment" and "consistency" and "cognitive dissonance"; the part
where we value something more highly *just* because it took more
work to get it.  The studies showing that subjective fraternity
pledges to a harsher initiation, causes them to be more convinced
of the value of the fraternity - identical wine in higher-priced
bottles being rated as tasting better - that sort of thing.

Of course, if you just have more fun solving a puzzle than being
told its answer, because you enjoy doing the cognitive work for its
own sake, there's nothing wrong with that.  The less charitable
reading would be if charging $100 to be told the answer to a
puzzle, made you think the answer was more interesting, worthwhile,
important, surprising, etc. than if you got the answer for free.

(I strongly suspect that a major part of science's PR problem in
the population at large is people who instinctively believe that if
knowledge is given away for free, it cannot be important.  If you
had to undergo a fearsome initiation ritual to be told the truth
about evolution, maybe people would be more satisfied with the
answer.)

The really uncharitable reading is that the joy of first discovery
is about status.  Competition.  Scarcity.  Beating everyone else to
the punch.  It doesn't matter whether you have a 3-room house or a
4-room house, what matters is having a bigger house than the
Joneses.  A 2-room house would be fine, if you could only ensure
that the Joneses had even less.

I don't object to competition as a matter of principle.  I don't
think that the game of Go is barbaric and should be suppressed,
even though it's zero-sum.  But if the euphoric joy of scientific
discovery *has* to be about scarcity, that means it's only
available to one person per civilization for any given truth.

If the joy of scientific discovery is one-shot per discovery, then,
from a fun-theoretic perspective, Newton probably used up a
substantial increment of the total Physics Fun available over the
entire history of Earth-originating intelligent life.  That selfish
bastard explained the orbits of planets *and* the tides.

And really the situation is even worse than this, because in the
Standard Model of physics (discovered by bastards who spoiled the
puzzle for everyone else) the universe is spatially infinite,
inflationarily branching, and branching via decoherence, which is
at least three different ways that Reality is exponentially or
infinitely large

So aliens, or alternate Newtons, or just Tegmark duplicates of
Newton, may all have discovered gravity before *our* Newton did -
if you believe that "before" means anything relative to those kinds
of separations.

When that thought first occurred to me, I actually found it quite
uplifting.  Once I realized that someone, somewhere in the expanses
of space and time, already knows the answer to any answerable
question - even biology questions and history questions; there are
other decoherent Earths - then I realized how silly it was to think
as if the joy of discovery ought to be limited to one person.  It
becomes a fully inescapable source of unresolvable existential
angst, and I regard that as a reductio.

The consistent solution which maintains the *possibility* of fun,
is to stop worrying about what other people know.  If you don't
know the answer, it's a mystery to you.  If you can raise your
hand, and clench your fingers into a fist, and you've got no idea
of how your brain is doing it - or even what exact muscles lay
beneath your skin - you've got to consider yourself just as
ignorant as a hunter-gatherer.  Sure, someone else knows the answer
- but back in the hunter-gatherer days, someone else in an
alternate Earth, or for that matter, someone else in the future,
knew what the answer was.  Mystery, and the joy of finding out, is
either a personal thing, or it doesn't exist at all - and I prefer
to say it's personal.

The joy of assisting your civilization by telling it something it
doesn't already know, does tend to be one-shot per discovery per
civilization; that kind of value is conserved, as are Nobel
Prizes.  And the prospect of that reward may be what it takes to
keep you focused on one problem for the years required to develop a
really *deep* understanding; plus, working on a problem unknown to
your civilization is a sure-fire way to avoid reading any
spoilers.

But as part of my general project to undo this idea that
rationalists have less fun, I want to restore the magic and mystery
to every part of the world which you do not *personally*
understand, regardless of what other knowledge may exist, far away
in space and time, or even in your next-door neighbor's mind.  If
*you* don't know, it's a mystery.  And now think of how many things
you don't know!  (If you can't think of anything, you have
[other problems](/lw/iq/guessing_the_teachers_password/).)  Isn't
the world suddenly a much more mysterious and magical and
*interesting* place?  As if you'd been transported into an
alternate dimension, and had to learn all the rules from scratch?

> "A friend once told me that I look at the world as if I've never
> seen it before. I thought, that's a nice compliment... Wait! I
> never *have* seen it before! What -- did everyone else get a
> preview?"   
>         --
> [Ran Prieur](http://www.ranprieur.com/me/100things.html)
