
# Mind Projection Fallacy

the dawn days of science fiction, alien invaders would occasionally
kidnap a girl in a torn dress and carry her off for intended
ravishing, as lovingly depicted on many ancient magazine covers. 
Oddly enough, the aliens never go after men in torn shirts.

Would a non-humanoid alien, with a different evolutionary history
and [evolutionary psychology](/lw/l1/evolutionary_psychology/),
sexually desire a human female?  It seems rather unlikely.  To put
it mildly.

People don't make mistakes like that by deliberately reasoning: 
"All possible minds are likely to be wired pretty much the same
way, therefore a bug-eyed monster will find human females
attractive."  Probably the artist did not even think to ask whether
an alien *perceives* human females as attractive.  Instead, a human
female in a torn dress *is sexy* - inherently so, as an intrinsic
property.

They who went astray did not think about the alien's evolutionary
history; they focused on the woman's torn dress.  If the dress were
not torn, the woman would be less sexy; the alien monster doesn't
enter into it.



Apparently we instinctively represent Sexiness as a direct
attribute of the Woman object, `Woman.sexiness`, like
`Woman.height` or `Woman.weight`.

If your brain uses that data structure, or something metaphorically
similar to it, then
[from the inside](/lw/no/how_an_algorithm_feels_from_inside/) it
feels like sexiness is an inherent property of the woman, not a
property of the alien looking at the woman.  Since the woman
*is attractive,* the alien monster will be *attracted* to her -
isn't that logical?

E. T. Jaynes used the term
[Mind Projection Fallacy](http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/6330.html) to
denote the error of projecting your own mind's properties into the
external world.  Jaynes, as a late grand master of the Bayesian
Conspiracy, was most concerned with the mistreatment of
*probabilities*as inherent properties of objects, rather than
states of partial knowledge in some particular mind.  More about
this shortly.

But the Mind Projection Fallacy generalizes as an error.  It is in
the argument over
[the real meaning of the word sound](/lw/np/disputing_definitions/),
and in the magazine cover of the monster carrying off a woman in
the torn dress, and Kant's declaration that space by its very
nature is flat, and Hume's definition of
[a priori](/lw/k2/a_priori/) ideas as those "discoverable by the
mere operation of thought, without dependence on what is anywhere
existent in the universe"...

(Incidentally, I once read an SF story about a human male who
entered into a sexual relationship with a sentient alien plant of
appropriately squishy fronds; discovered that it was an
[androecious](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plant_sexuality) (male)
plant; agonized about this for a bit; and finally decided that it
didn't really matter at that point.  And in Foglio and Pollotta's
*Illegal Aliens,* the humans land on a planet inhabited by sentient
insects, and see a movie advertisement showing a human carrying off
a bug in a delicate chiffon dress.  Just thought I'd mention
that.)
