
# Reductive Reference

The reductionist thesis (as I formulate it) is that human minds,
for reasons of efficiency, use a multi-level map in which we
separately *think* about things like "atoms" and "quarks", "hands"
and "fingers", or "heat" and "kinetic energy".  Reality itself, on
the other hand, is single-level in the sense that it does not seem
to contain atoms as *separate, additional, causally efficacious*
entities *over and above* quarks.

Sadi Carnot formulated the (precursor to) the second law of
thermodynamics using the caloric theory of heat, in which heat was
just a fluid that flowed from hot things to cold things, produced
by fire, making gases expand - the effects of heat were studied
separately from the science of kinetics, considerably before the
reduction took place.  If you're trying to design a steam engine,
the effects of all those tiny vibrations and collisions which we
name "heat" can be summarized into a much simpler description than
the full quantum mechanics of the quarks.  Humans compute
efficiently, thinking of only significant effects on goal-relevant
quantities.

But reality itself does seem to use the full quantum mechanics of
the quarks.  I [once met a fellow](/lw/on/reductionism/) who
thought that if you used General Relativity to compute a
low-velocity problem, like an artillery shell, GR would give you
the *wrong answer* - not just a slow answer, but an
*experimentally wrong* answer - because at low velocities,
artillery shells are governed by Newtonian mechanics, not GR.  This
is exactly how physics does *not* work.  Reality just seems to go
on crunching through General Relativity, even when it only makes a
difference at the fourteenth decimal place, which a human would
regard as a huge waste of computing power.  Physics does it with
brute force.  No one has *ever*caught physics simplifying its
calculations - or if someone did catch it, the Matrix Lords erased
the memory afterward.

Our map, then, is very much unlike the territory; our maps are
multi-level, the territory is single-level.  Since the
representation is so incredibly unlike the referent, in what sense
can a belief like "I am wearing socks" be called *true,* when in
reality itself, there are only quarks?

In case you've forgotten what the word "true" means, the classic
definition was given by Alfred Tarski:

> The statement "snow is white" is *true* if and only if snow is
> white.





In case you've forgotten what the difference is between the
statement "I believe 'snow is white'" and "'Snow is white' is
true", see [here](/lw/om/qualitatively_confused/).  Truth can't be
evaluated *just* by looking inside your own head - if you want to
know, for example, whether "the morning star = the evening star",
you need a telescope; it's not enough just to look at the beliefs
themselves.

This is the point missed by the postmodernist folks screaming, "But
how do you *know* your beliefs are true?"  When you do an
experiment, you actually *are* going outside your own head.  You're
engaging in a complex interaction whose outcome is causally
determined by the thing you're reasoning about, not just your
beliefs about it.  I once
[defined "reality" as follows](http://yudkowsky.net/bayes/truth.html):

> Even when I have a simple hypothesis, strongly supported by all the
> evidence I know, sometimes I'm still surprised. So I need different
> names for the thingies that determine my predictions and the thingy
> that determines my experimental results. I call the former thingies
> 'belief', and the latter thingy 'reality'."

The interpretation of your experiment still depends on your prior
beliefs.  I'm not going to talk, for the moment, about Where Priors
Come From, because that is not the subject of this blog post.  My
point is that truth refers to an *ideal* comparison between a
belief and reality.  Because we understand that planets are
distinct from beliefs about planets, we can design an experiment to
test whether the belief "the morning star and the evening star are
the same planet" is *true.*  This experiment will involve
telescopes, not just introspection, because we understand that
"truth" involves comparing an internal belief to an external fact;
so we use an instrument, the telescope, whose perceived behavior we
believe to depend on the external fact of the planet.

Believing that the telescope helps us evaluate the "truth" of
"morning star = evening star", relies on our prior beliefs about
the telescope interacting with the planet.  Again, I'm not going to
address that in this particular blog post, except to quote one of
my favorite Raymond Smullyan lines:  "If the more sophisticated
reader objects to this statement on the grounds of its being a mere
tautology, then please at least give the statement credit for not
being inconsistent."  Similarly, I don't see the use of a telescope
as circular logic, but as reflective coherence; for every
systematic way of arriving at truth, there ought to be a rational
explanation for how it works.

The question on the table is what it *means* for "snow is white" to
be *true,* when, in reality, there are just quarks.

There's a certain pattern of neural connections making up your
beliefs about "snow" and "whiteness" - we believe this, but we do
not know, and cannot concretely visualize, the actual neural
connections.  Which are, themselves, embodied in a pattern of
quarks even less known.  Out there in the world, there are water
molecules whose temperature is low enough that they have arranged
themselves in tiled repeating patterns; they look nothing like the
tangles of neurons.  In what sense, comparing one
(ever-fluctuating) pattern of quarks to the other, is the belief
"snow is white" *true?*

Obviously, neither I nor anyone else can offer an Ideal Quark
Comparer Function that accepts a quark-level description of a
neurally embodied belief (including the surrounding brain) and a
quark-level description of a snowflake (and the surrounding laws of
optics), and outputs "true" or "false" over "snow is white".  And
who says the fundamental level is *really* about particle fields?

On the other hand, throwing out all beliefs because they aren't
written as gigantic unmanageable specifications about quarks we
can't even see... doesn't seem like a very prudent idea. 
[Not the best way to optimize our goals.](/lw/nb/something_to_protect/) 

It seems to me that a word like "snow" or "white" can be taken as a
kind of promissory note - not a *known* specification of exactly
which physical quark configurations count as "snow", but,
nonetheless, there are
[things you call snow and things you don't call snow](/lw/nh/extensions_and_intensions/),
and even if you got a few items wrong (like plastic snow), an Ideal
Omniscient Science Interpreter would see
[a tight cluster in the center](/lw/nl/the_cluster_structure_of_thingspace/)
and [redraw the boundary](/lw/o0/where_to_draw_the_boundary/) to
have a
[simpler definition](/lw/o3/superexponential_conceptspace_and_simple_words/).

In a single-layer universe whose bottom layer is unknown, or
uncertain, or just too large to talk about, the concepts in a
multi-layer mind can be said to represent a kind of promissory note
- we don't know *what* they correspond to, out there.  But it seems
to us that we can distinguish positive from negative cases, in a
[predictively productive way](/lw/o2/mutual_information_and_density_in_thingspace/),
so we think - perhaps in a fully general sense - that there is
*some* difference of quarks, *some* difference of configurations at
the fundamental level, which explains the differences that feed
into our senses, and ultimately result in our saying "snow" or "not
snow".

I see this white stuff, and it is the same on several occasions, so
I hypothesize a stable latent cause in the environment - I give it
the name "snow"; "snow" is then a promissory note referring to a
believed-in simple boundary that could be drawn around the unseen
causes of my experience.

Hilary Putnam's "Twin Earth" thought experiment, where water is not
H20 but some strange other substance denoted XYZ, otherwise
behaving much like water, and the subsequent philosophical debate,
helps to highlight this issue.  "Snow" doesn't have a logical
definition known to us - it's more like an empirically determined
pointer to a logical definition.  This is true even if you believe
that snow is ice crystals is low-temperature tiled water
molecules.  The water molecules are made of quarks.  What if quarks
turn out to be made of something else?  What *is* a snowflake,
then?  You don't know - but it's still a snowflake, not a fire
hydrant.

And of course, these very paragraphs I have just written, are
likewise far above the level of quarks.  "Sensing white stuff,
visually categorizing it, and thinking 'snow' or 'not snow'" - this
is also talking very far above the quarks.  So my meta-beliefs are
also promissory notes, for things that an Ideal Omniscient Science
Interpreter might know about which configurations of the quarks (or
whatever) making up my brain, correspond to "believing 'snow is
white'".

But then, the entire grasp that we have upon reality, is made up of
promissory notes of this kind.  So, rather than calling it
circular, I prefer to call it self-consistent.

This can be a bit unnerving - maintaining a precarious epistemic
perch, in both object-level beliefs and reflection, far above a
huge unknown underlying fundamental reality, and hoping one doesn't
fall off.

On reflection, though, it's hard to see how things could be any
other way.

So at the end of the day, the statement "reality does not contain
hands as fundamental, additional, separate causal entities, over
and above quarks" is not the same statement as "hands do not exist"
or "I don't have any hands".  There are no *fundamental* hands;
hands are made of fingers, palm, and thumb, which in turn are made
of muscle and bone, all the way down to elementary particle fields,
which are the fundamental causal entities, so far as we currently
know.

This is not the same as saying, "there are no 'hands'."  It is not
the same as saying, "the word 'hands' is a promissory note that
will never be paid, because there is no empirical cluster that
corresponds to it"; or "the 'hands' note will never be paid,
because it is logically impossible to reconcile its supposed
characteristics"; or "the statement 'humans have hands' refers to a
sensible state of affairs, but reality is not in that state".

Just:  There are patterns that exist *in* reality where we see
"hands", and these patterns have something in common, but they are
not fundamental.

If I *really* had no hands - if reality suddenly transitioned to be
in a state that we would describe as "Eliezer has no hands" -
reality would shortly thereafter correspond to a state we would
describe as "Eliezer screams as blood jets out of his wrist
stumps".

And this is *true,* even though the above paragraph hasn't
specified any quark positions.

The previous sentence is likewise meta-true.

The map is multilevel, the territory is single-level.  This doesn't
mean that the higher levels "don't exist", like looking in your
garage for a dragon and finding nothing there, or like seeing a
mirage in the desert and forming an expectation of drinkable water
when there is nothing to drink.  The higher levels of your map are
not *false,* without referent*;* they have referents *in* the
single level of physics.  It's not that the wings of an airplane
unexist - then the airplane would drop out of the sky.  The "wings
of an airplane" exist *explicitly* in an engineer's multilevel
model of an airplane, and the wings of an airplane exist
*implicitly* in the quantum physics of the real airplane.  Implicit
existence is not the same as nonexistence.  The exact description
of this implicitness is not known to us - is not explicitly
represented in our map.  But this does not prevent our map from
working, or even prevent it from being *true.*

Though it is a bit unnerving to contemplate that every single
concept and belief in your brain, including these meta-concepts
about how your brain works and why you can form accurate beliefs,
are perched orders and orders of magnitude above reality...*  
*
