
# Scarcity

What follows is taken primarily from Robert Cialdini's
*Influence: The Psychology of Persuasion.*  I own three copies of
this book, one for myself, and two for loaning to friends.

S*carcity,* as that term is used in social psychology, is when
things become *more desirable* as they appear *less obtainable*.

-   If you put a two-year-old boy in a room with two toys, one toy
    in the open and the other behind a Plexiglas wall, the two-year-old
    will ignore the easily accessible toy and go after the apparently
    forbidden one.  If the wall is low enough to be easily climbable,
    the toddler is no more likely to go after one toy than the other. 
    (Brehm and Weintraub 1977.)  
     
-   When Dade County forbade use or possession of phosphate
    detergents, many Dade residents drove to nearby counties and bought
    huge amounts of phosphate laundry detergents.  Compared to Tampa
    residents not affected by the regulation, Dade residents rated
    phosphate detergents as gentler, more effective, more powerful on
    stains, and even believed that phosphate detergents poured more
    easily.  (Mazis 1975, Mazis et. al. 1973.)

Similarly, information that appears forbidden or secret, seems more
important and trustworthy:

-   When University of North Carolina students learned that a
    speech opposing coed dorms had been banned, they became more
    opposed to coed dorms (without even hearing the speech).  (Probably
    in Ashmore et. al. 1971.)  
     
-   When a driver said he had liability insurance, experimental
    jurors awarded his victim an average of four thousand dollars more
    than if the driver said he had no insurance.  If the judge
    afterward informed the jurors that information about insurance was
    inadmissible and must be ignored, jurors awarded an average of
    thirteen thousand dollars more than if the driver had no
    insurance.  (Broeder 1959.)  
     
-   Buyers for supermarkets, told by a supplier that beef was in
    scarce supply, gave orders for twice as much beef as buyers told it
    was readily available.  Buyers told that beef was in scarce supply,
    and furthermore, that the information about scarcity was itself
    scarce - that the shortage was not general knowledge - ordered six
    times as much beef.  (Since the study was conducted in a real-world
    context, the information provided was in fact correct.) 
    (Knishinsky 1982.)

The conventional theory for explaining this is "psychological
reactance", social-psychology-speak for "When you tell people they
can't do something, they'll just try even harder."  The fundamental
instincts involved appear to be preservation of status and
preservation of options.  We resist dominance, when any human
agency tries to restrict our freedom.  And when options seem to be
in danger of disappearing, even from natural causes, we try to leap
on the option before it's gone.

Leaping on disappearing options may be a good adaptation in a
[hunter-gatherer](/lw/l0/adaptationexecuters_not_fitnessmaximizers/)
society - gather the fruits while the tree is still in bloom - but
in a money-based society it can be rather costly.   Cialdini (1993)
reports that in one appliance store he observed, a salesperson who
saw that a customer was evincing signs of interest in an appliance
would approach, and sadly inform the customer that the item was out
of stock, the last one having been sold only twenty minutes ago. 
Scarcity creating a sudden jump in desirability, the customer would
often ask whether there was any chance that the salesperson could
locate an unsold item in the back room, warehouse, or anywhere. 
"Well," says the salesperson, "that's possible, and I'm willing to
check; but do I understand that this is the model you want, and if
I can find it at this price, you'll take it?"

As Cialdini remarks, a chief sign of this malfunction is that you
dream of *possessing* something, rather than *using* it.  (Timothy
Ferriss offers similar advice on planning your life: ask which
*ongoing experiences* would make you happy, rather than which
possessions or status-changes.)

But the really fundamental problem with desiring the unattainable
is that
[as soon as you actually *get* it, it stops being unattainable](/lw/ou/if_you_demand_magic_magic_wont_help/). 
If we cannot take joy in the merely available, our lives will
*always* be frustrated...


* * * * *

Ashmore, R. D., Ramachandra, V. and Jones, R. A. (1971.)
"Censorship as an Attitude Change Induction."  Paper presented at
Eastern Psychological Association meeting, New York, April 1971.

Brehm, S. S. and Weintraub, M. (1977.) "Physical Barriers and
Psychological Reactance: Two-year-olds' Responses to Threats to
Freedom."  *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,* **35**:
830-36.

Broeder, D. (1959.)  "The University of Chicago Jury Project."
*Nebraska Law Review* **38**: 760-74.

Cialdini, R. B. (1993.) 
*Influence:  The Psychology of Persuasion: Revised Edition.*  Pp.
237-71.  New York: Quill.

Knishinsky, A. (1982.)  "The Effects of Scarcity of Material and
Exclusivity of Information on Industrial Buyer Perceived Risk in
Provoking a Purchase Decision."  Doctoral dissertation, Arizona
State University.

Mazis, M. B. (1975.) "Antipollution Measures and Psychological
Reactance Theory: A Field Experiment."
*Journal of Personality and Social Psychology* **31**: 654-66.

Mazis, M. B., Settle, R. B. and Leslie, D. C. (1973.) "Elimination
of Phosphate Detergents and Psychological Reactance." 
*Journal of Marketing Research* **10**: 390-95.
