
# The Beauty of Settled Science

Facts [do not need](/lw/or/joy_in_the_merely_real/) to be
unexplainable, to be beautiful; truths do not become
[less worth learning](/lw/os/joy_in_discovery/), if someone else
knows them; beliefs do not become
[less worthwhile](/lw/ou/if_you_demand_magic_magic_wont_help/), if
many others share them...

...and if you only care about scientific issues that are
controversial, you will end up with a head stuffed full of
garbage.

The media thinks that only the cutting edge of science is worth
reporting on.  How often do you see headlines like "General
Relativity still governing planetary orbits" or "Phlogiston theory
remains false"?  So, by the time anything is solid science, it is
no longer a breaking headline.  "Newsworthy" science is often based
on the thinnest of evidence and wrong half the time - if it were
not on the uttermost fringes of the scientific frontier, it would
not be breaking news.

Scientific *controversies* are problems *so difficult* that even
people who've spent years mastering the field can still fool
themselves.  That's what makes for the heated arguments that
attract all the media attention.

Worse, if you aren't in the field and part of the game,
controversies*aren't even fun*.

Oh, sure, you can have the fun of picking a side in an argument. 
But you can get that in any
[football game](/lw/mg/the_twoparty_swindle/).  That's not what the
fun of science is about.

Reading a well-written textbook, you get:  Carefully phrased
explanations for incoming students, math derived step by step
(where applicable), plenty of experiments cited as illustration
(where applicable), test problems on which to display your new
mastery, and a reasonably good guarantee that what you're learning
is actually true.

Reading press releases, you usually get: 
[Fake explanations](/lw/ip/fake_explanations/) that convey nothing
except the
[delusion of understanding](/lw/iq/guessing_the_teachers_password/)
of a result that the press release author didn't understand and
that probably has a better-than-even chance of failing to
replicate.

Modern science is built on discoveries, built on discoveries, built
on discoveries, and so on, all the way back to people like
Archimedes, who discovered facts like why boats float, that can
make sense even if you don't know about other discoveries.  A good
place to start traveling that road is at the beginning.

Don't be embarrassed to read *elementary* science textbooks,
either.  If you want to pretend to be sophisticated, go find a play
to sneer at.  If you just want to have *fun,* remember that
simplicity is at the core of scientific beauty.

And thinking you can jump right into the frontier, when you haven't
learned the settled science, is like...

...like trying to climb only the *top* half of Mount Everest (which
is the only part that interests you) by standing at the base of the
mountain, bending your knees, and jumping *really hard* (so you can
pass over the boring parts).

Now I'm not saying that you should never pay attention to
scientific controversies.  If 40% of oncologists think that white
socks cause cancer, and the other 60% violently disagree, this is
an important fact to know.

Just don't go thinking that science *has* to be controversial to be
interesting.

Or, for that matter, that science has to be recent to be
interesting.  A steady diet of science *news* is bad for you:  You
are what you eat, and if you eat only science reporting on fluid
situations, without a solid textbook now and then, your brain will
turn to liquid.
