
# To Spread Science, Keep It Secret

Sometimes I wonder if the Pythagoreans had the right idea.

Yes, I've
[written](/lw/in/scientific_evidence_legal_evidence_rational/)
about how "science" is inherently public.  I've written that
"science" is distinguished from merely rational knowledge by the
in-principle ability to reproduce scientific experiments for
yourself, to know without relying on authority.  I've said that
"science" should be defined as the publicly accessible knowledge of
humankind.  I've even suggested that future generations will regard
all papers not published in an open-access journal as non-science,
i.e., it can't be part of the public knowledge of humankind if you
make people pay to read it.

But that's only one vision of the future.  In another vision, the
knowledge we now call "science" is taken *out* of the public domain
- the books and journals hidden away, guarded by
[mystic cults](/lw/md/cultish_countercultishness/) of
[gurus](/lw/m2/the_litany_against_gurus/) wearing
[robes](/lw/m4/two_cult_koans/), requiring fearsome initiation
rituals for access - so that more people will *actually* study it.

I mean, right now, people *can* study science but they *don't.*

"[Scarcity](/lw/oz/scarcity/)", it's called in
[social psychology](http://www.google.com/search?q=scarcity+psychology). 
What appears to be in limited supply, is more highly valued.  And
this effect is *especially* strong with information - we're much
more likely to try to obtain information that we believe is secret,
and to value it more when we do obtain it.

With science, I think, people assume that if the information is
freely available, it must not be important.  So instead people join
cults that have the sense to keep their Great Truths secret.  The
Great Truth may actually be gibberish, but it's more satisfying
than coherent science, because it's *secret.*

Science is the great Purloined Letter of our times, left out in the
open and ignored.

Sure, scientific openness helps the scientific elite.  They've
already *been* through the initiation rituals.  But for the rest of
the planet, science is kept secret a hundred times more effectively
by making it freely available, than if its books were guarded in
vaults and you had to walk over hot coals to get access.  (This
being a fearsome trial indeed, since the great secrets of
insulation are only available to Physicist-Initiates of the Third
Level.)

If scientific knowledge were hidden in ancient vaults (rather than
hidden in inconvenient pay-for-access journals), at least then
people would *try* to get into the vaults.  They'd be *desperate*
to learn science.  Especially when they saw the power that Eighth
Level Physicists could wield, and were told that they
*weren't allowed to know* the explanation.

And if you tried to start a cult around oh, say, Scientology, you'd
get some degree of public interest, at first.  But people would
very quickly start asking uncomfortable questions like "Why haven't
you given a public demonstration of your Eighth Level powers, like
the Physicists?" and "How come none of the Master Mathematicians
seem to want to join your cult?" and "Why should I follow your
Founder when he isn't an Eighth Level anything outside his own
cult?" and "Why should I study *your* cult *first,* when the
Dentists of Doom can do things that are so much more impressive?"

When you look at it from that perspective, the escape of math from
the Pythagorean cult starts to look like a major strategic blunder
for humanity.

Now, I know what you're going to say:  "But science *is* surrounded
by fearsome initiation rituals!  Plus it's *inherently* difficult
to learn!  Why doesn't *that* count?"  Because the public *thinks*
that science is freely available, that's why.  If you're *allowed*
to learn, it must not be important enough *to* learn.

It's an image problem, people taking their cues from others'
attitudes.  Just *anyone* can walk into the supermarket and buy a
light bulb, and nobody looks at it with awe and reverence.  The
physics supposedly aren't secret (even though
[*you* don't know](/lw/os/joy_in_discovery/)), and there's a
one-paragraph [explanation](/lw/ip/fake_explanations/) in the
newspaper that sounds vaguely authoritative and convincing -
essentially, no one treats the lightbulb as a sacred mystery, so
neither do you.

Even the simplest little things, completely inert objects like
crucifixes, can become magical if everyone *looks* at them like
they're magic.  But since you're theoretically *allowed* to know
why the light bulb works without climbing the mountain to find the
remote Monastery of Electricians, there's no need to *actually*
bother to learn.

Now, because science does in fact have initiation rituals both
social and cognitive, scientists are not wholly dissatisfied with
their science.  The problem is that, in the present world, very few
people bother to study science in the first place.  Science cannot
be the true Secret Knowledge, because just anyone is allowed to
know it - *even though, in fact, they don't*.

If the Great Secret of Natural Selection, passed down from Darwin
Who Is Not Forgotten, was only ever imparted to you after you paid
$2000 and went through a ceremony involving torches and robes and
masks and sacrificing an ox, *then*when you were shown the fossils,
and shown
[the optic cable going through the retina](/lw/kr/an_alien_god/)
under a microscope, and finally told the Truth, you would say
"That's the most brilliant thing ever!" and *be satisfied.*  After
that, if some other cult tried to tell you it was actually a
bearded man in the sky 6000 years ago, you'd laugh like hell.

And you know, it might actually be more *fun* to do things that
way.  Especially if the initiation required you to put together
some of the evidence for yourself - together, or with classmates -
before you could tell your Science Sensei you were ready to advance
to the next level.  It wouldn't be *efficient,* sure, but it would
be *fun.*

If humanity had never made the mistake - never gone down the
religious path, and never learned to fear anything that smacks of
religion - then maybe the Ph.D. granting ceremony would involve
litanies and chanting, because, hey, that's what people like.  Why
take the fun out of everything?

Maybe we're just doing it wrong.

And no, I'm not *seriously* proposing that we try to reverse the
last five hundred years of openness and classify all the science
secret.  At least, not at the moment.  Efficiency is important for
now, especially in things like medical research.  I'm just
explaining why it is that I won't tell anyone the Secret of
[how the ineffable difference between blueness and redness arises from mere atoms](/lw/og/wrong_questions/)
for less than $100,000 -

Ahem!  I meant to say, I'm telling you about this vision of an
alternate Earth, so that you give science equal treatment with
cults.  So that you don't undervalue scientific truth when you
learn it, *just* because it doesn't seem to be protected
appropriately to its value.  *Imagine* the robes and masks. 
Visualize yourself creeping into the vaults and stealing the Lost
Knowledge of Newton.  And don't be fooled by any organization that
*does* use robes and masks, unless they also show you the data.

People seem to have
[holes in their minds](/lw/oy/is_humanism_a_religionsubstitute/)
for Esoteric Knowledge, Deep Secrets, the Hidden Truth.  And I'm
not even criticizing this psychology!  There *are* deep secret
esoteric hidden truths, like quantum mechanics or
[Bayes-structure](/lw/o7/searching_for_bayesstructure/).  We've
just gotten into the habit of presenting the Hidden Truth in a very
*unsatisfying* way, wrapped up in false mundanity.

But if the holes for secret knowledge are not filled by true
beliefs, they will be filled by false beliefs.  There is
*nothing but* science to learn - the emotional energy must either
be [invested in reality](/lw/ot/bind_yourself_to_reality/), or
wasted in total nonsense, or destroyed.  For myself, I think it is
better to invest the emotional energy; fun should not be needlessly
cast away.

Right now, we've got the worst of both worlds.  Science isn't
*really* free, because the courses are expensive and the textbooks
are expensive.  But the public *thinks* that anyone is allowed to
know, so it must not be important.

Ideally, you would want to arrange things the other way around.
