
# Wrong Questions

Where the mind cuts against reality's grain, it generates
*wrong questions* - questions that cannot possibly be answered
*on their own terms,* but only
[dissolved](/lw/of/dissolving_the_question/) by understanding the
cognitive algorithm that generates the *perception* of a question.

One good cue that you're dealing with a "wrong question" is when
you cannot even *imagine* any concrete, specific state of
how-the-world-is that would answer the question.  When it doesn't
even seem *possible* to answer the question.

Take the
[Standard Definitional Dispute](/lw/np/disputing_definitions/), for
example, about the tree falling in a deserted forest.  Is there any
way-the-world-could-be - any state of affairs - that corresponds to
the word "sound" *really meaning* only acoustic vibrations, or
*really* *meaning* only auditory experiences?

("Why, yes," says the one, "it is the state of affairs where
'sound' means acoustic vibrations."  So
[Taboo](/lw/nv/replace_the_symbol_with_the_substance/) the word
'means', and 'represents', and all similar synonyms, and describe
again:  How can the world be, what state of affairs, would make one
side right, and the other side wrong?)

Or if that seems too easy, take free will:  What concrete state of
affairs, whether in deterministic physics, or in physics with a
dice-rolling random component, could ever correspond to having free
will?

And if *that* seems too easy, then ask "Why does anything exist at
all?", and then tell me what a satisfactory answer to that question
would even *look like.*

And no, I don't know the answer to that last one.  But I *can*
guess one thing, based on my previous experience with unanswerable
questions.  The answer will not consist of some grand triumphant
First Cause.  The question will go away as a result of some insight
into how my mental algorithms run skew to reality, after which I
will understand how the question itself was wrong from the
beginning - how the question itself assumed the fallacy, contained
the skew.

Mystery exists in the mind, not in reality.  If I am ignorant about
a phenomenon, that is a fact about my state of mind, not a fact
about the phenomenon itself.  All the more so, if it seems like no
possible answer can exist:  Confusion exists in the map, not in the
territory.  *Unanswerable* questions do not mark places where magic
enters the universe.  They mark places where your mind runs skew to
reality.

Such questions *must* be dissolved.  Bad things happen when you try
to answer them.  It inevitably generates the worst sort of
[Mysterious Answer to a Mysterious Question](/lw/iu/mysterious_answers_to_mysterious_questions/): 
The one where you come up with seemingly strong arguments for your
Mysterious Answer, but the "answer" doesn't let you make any new
predictions even in retrospect, and the phenomenon still possesses
the same sacred inexplicability that it had at the start.

I could guess, for example, that the answer to the puzzle of the
First Cause is that nothing *does* exist - that the whole concept
of "existence" is bogus.  But if you sincerely believed that, would
you be any less confused?  Me neither.

But the wonderful thing about *unanswerable* questions is that they
are *always* solvable, at least in my experience.  What went
through Queen Elizabeth I's mind, first thing in the morning, as
she woke up on her fortieth birthday?  As I can easily
*imagine*answers to this question, I can readily see that I may
never be able to *actually* answer it, the true information having
been lost in time.

On the other hand, "Why does anything exist at all?" seems *so*
absolutely impossible that I can infer that I am just confused, one
way or another, and the truth probably isn't all that complicated
in an absolute sense, and once the confusion goes away I'll be able
to see it.

This may seem counterintuitive if you've never solved an
unanswerable question, but I assure you that it *is* how these
things work.

Coming tomorrow:  A simple trick for handling "wrong questions".
