
# How To Convince Me That 2 + 2 = 3

In "What is Evidence?", I [wrote](/lw/jl/what_is_evidence/):

> This is why rationalists put such a heavy premium on the
> paradoxical-seeming claim that a belief is only really *worthwhile*
> if you could, in principle, be persuaded to believe otherwise.  If
> your retina ended up in the same state regardless of what light
> entered it, you would be blind...  Hence the phrase, "blind
> faith".  If what you believe doesn't depend on what you see, you've
> been blinded as effectively as by poking out your eyeballs.

Cihan Baran
[replied](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/09/what-is-evidenc.html#comment-83739949):

> I can not conceive of a situation that would make 2+2 = 4 false.
> Perhaps for that reason, my belief in 2+2=4 is unconditional.

I admit, I cannot conceive of a "situation" that would *make* 2 + 2
= 4 false.  (There are redefinitions, but those are not
"situations", and then you're no longer talking about 2, 4, =, or
+.)  But that doesn't make my belief unconditional.  I find it
quite easy to imagine a situation which would *convince* me that 2
+ 2 = 3.

Suppose I got up one morning, and took out two earplugs, and set
them down next to two other earplugs on my nighttable, and noticed
that there were now three earplugs, without any earplugs having
appeared or disappeared - in contrast to my stored memory that 2 +
2 was supposed to equal 4.  Moreover, when I visualized the process
in my own mind, it seemed that making XX and XX come out to XXXX
required an extra X to appear from nowhere, and was, moreover,
inconsistent with other arithmetic I visualized, since subtracting
XX from XXX left XX, but subtracting XX from XXXX left XXX.  This
would conflict with my stored memory that 3 - 2 = 1, but memory
would be absurd in the face of physical and mental confirmation
that XXX - XX = XX.

I would also check a pocket calculator, Google, and perhaps my copy
of 1984 where Winston writes that "Freedom is the freedom to say
two plus two equals three."  All of these would naturally show that
the rest of the world agreed with my current visualization, and
disagreed with my memory, that 2 + 2 = 3.

How could I possibly have ever been so deluded as to believe that 2
+ 2 = 4?  Two explanations would come to mind:  First, a
neurological fault (possibly caused by a sneeze) had made all the
additive sums in my stored memory go up by one.  Second, someone
was messing with me, by hypnosis or by my being a computer
simulation.  In the second case, I would think it more likely that
they had messed with my arithmetic *recall* than that 2 + 2
*actually* equalled 4.  Neither of these plausible-sounding
explanations would prevent me from
[noticing that I was very, very, *very*** **confused](/lw/if/your_strength_as_a_rationalist/).

What would convince me that 2 + 2 = 3, in other words, is exactly
the same kind of evidence that currently convinces me that 2 + 2 =
4:  The evidential crossfire of physical observation, mental
visualization, and social agreement.

There was a time when I had no idea that 2 + 2 = 4.  I did not
arrive at this *new*belief by random processes - then there would
have been no particular reason for my brain to end up storing "2 +
2 = 4" instead of "2 + 2 = 7".  The fact that my brain stores an
answer surprisingly similar to what happens when I lay down two
earplugs alongside two earplugs, calls forth an explanation of what
entanglement produces this strange mirroring of mind and reality.

There's really only two possibilities, for a belief of
[fact](/lw/hp/feeling_rational/) - either the belief got there via
[a mind-reality entangling process](/lw/jl/what_is_evidence/), or
not.  If not, the belief can't be correct except by coincidence. 
For beliefs with the slightest shred of internal
[complexity](/lw/jp/occams_razor/) (requiring a computer program of
more than 10 bits to simulate), the space of possibilities is large
enough that coincidence vanishes.

Unconditional facts are not the same as unconditional beliefs.  If
entangled evidence convinces me that a fact is unconditional, this
doesn't mean I always believed in the fact without need of
entangled evidence.

I believe that 2 + 2 = 4, and I find it quite easy to conceive of a
situation which would convince me that 2 + 2 = 3.  Namely, the same
sort of situation that currently convinces me that 2 + 2 = 4.  Thus
I do not fear that I am a victim of blind faith.

If there are any Christians in the audience
*who know Bayes's Theorem* (no numerophobes, please) might I
inquire of you what situation would convince you of the truth of
Islam?  Presumably it would be the same sort of situation causally
responsible for producing your current belief in Christianity:  We
would push you screaming out of the uterus of a Muslim woman, and
have you raised by Muslim parents who continually told you that it
is good to believe unconditionally in Islam.  Or is there more to
it than that?  If so, what situation would convince you of Islam,
or at least, non-Christianity?
