
# Changing Emotions

*    Lest anyone reading this journal of a primitive man should think we spend our time mired in abstractions, let me also say that I am discovering the*richness
*available to those who are willing to alter their major characteristics.  The variety of emotions available to a reconfigured human mind, thinking thoughts impossible to its ancestors...  
    The emotion of -\*-, describable only as something between sexual love and the joy of intellection - making love to a thought?  Or &&, the true reverse of pain, not "pleasure" but a "warning" of healing, growth and change. Or (\^+\^), the most complex emotion yet discovered, felt by those who consciously endure the change between mind configurations, and experience the broad spectrum of possibilities inherent in thinking and being.*  
        -- Greg Bear, *Eon*

So... I'm basically on board with that sort of thing as a fine and
desirable future*.*  But I think that the *difficulty* and *danger*
of fiddling with emotions is oft-underestimated.  Not necessarily
underestimated by Greg Bear, *per se;* the above journal entry is
from a character who was receiving superintelligent help.

But I still remember one time on the Extropians mailing list when
someone talked about creating a female yet "otherwise identical"
copy of himself.  Something about that just fell on my camel's back
as the last straw.  I'm sorry, but there are some things that are
much more complicated to *actually do* than to rattle off as short
English phrases, and "changing sex" has to rank very high on that
list.  Even if you're omnipotent so far as raw ability goes, it's
not like people have a binary attribute reading "M" or "F" that can
be flipped as a primitive action.

Changing sex makes a good, vivid example of the sort of
difficulties you might run into when messing with emotional
architecture, so I'll use it as my archetype:



Let's suppose that we're talking about an M2F transformation.  (F2M
should be a straightforward transform of this discussion; I do want
to be specific rather than talking in vague generalities, but I
don't want to parallelize every sentence.)  (Oddly enough, every
time I can recall hearing someone say "I want to know what it's
like to be the opposite sex", the speaker has been male.  I don't
know if that's a genuine gender difference in wishes, or just a
selection effect in which spoken wishes reach my ears.)

Want to spend a week wearing a female body?  Even at this very
shallow level, we're dealing with drastic remappings of at least
some segments of the sensorimotor cortex and cerebellum - the
somatic map, the motor map, the motor reflexes, and the motor
skills.  As a male, you know how to operate a male body, but not a
female one.  If you're a master martial artist as a male, you won't
be a master martial artist as a female (or vice versa, of course)
unless you either spend another year practicing, or some AI subtly
tweaks your skills to be what they would have been in a female body
- think of how odd *that* experience would be.

Already we're talking about some pretty significant neurological
changes.  Strong enough to disrupt personal identity, if taken in
one shot?  That's a [difficult question](/lw/og/wrong_questions/)
to answer, especially since I don't know what experiment to perform
to test any hypotheses.  On one hand, billions of neurons in my
visual cortex undergo massive changes of activation every time my
eyes squeeze shut when I sneeze - the raw number of flipped bits is
not the key thing in personal identity.  But we *are*already
talking about serious changes of information, on the order of going
to sleep, dreaming, forgetting your dreams, and waking up the next
morning as though it were the next moment.  *Not*informationally
[trivial transforms like uploading](/lw/r9/quantum_mechanics_and_personal_identity/).

What about sex?  (Somehow it's always about sex, at least when it's
men asking the question.)  Remapping the connections from the
remapped somatic areas to the pleasure center will... give you a
vagina-shaped penis, more or less.  That doesn't make you a woman. 
You'd still be attracted to girls, and no, that would not make you
a lesbian; it would make you a normal, masculine man wearing a
female body like a suit of clothing.

What would it take for a man to actually *become* the female
version of themselves?

Well... what does that sentence even *mean?*  I am reminded of
someone who replied to the statement "Obama would not have become
President if he hadn't been black" by saying "If Obama hadn't been
black, he wouldn't have been Obama" i.e. "There is no non-black
Obama who could fail to become President".  (You know you're in
trouble when non-actual possible worlds start having political
implications.)

The person you would have been if you'd been born with an X
chromosome in place of your Y chromosome (or vice versa) isn't
*you.*  If you had a twin female sister, the two of you would not
be the same person.  There are genes on your Y chromosome that
tweaked your brain to some extent, helping to construct your
personal identity - alleles with *no analogue* on the X
chromosome.  There is no version of *you*, even genetically, who is
the opposite sex.

And if we halt your body, swap out your Y chromosome for your
father's X chromosome, and restart your body... well.  That doesn't
sound too safe, does it?  Your neurons are already wired in a male
pattern, just as your body already developed in a male pattern.  I
don't know *what* happens to your testicles, and I don't know what
happens to your brain, either.  Maybe your circuits would slowly
start to rewire themselves under the influence of the new genetic
instructions.  At best you'd end up as a half-baked cross between
male brain and female brain.  At worst you'd go into a permanent
epileptic fit and die - we're dealing with
[circumstances way outside the evolutionary context under which the brain was optimized for robustness](/lw/xd/growing_up_is_hard/). 
Either way, your brain would not look like your twin sister's brain
that had developed as female from the beginning.

So to actually *become female...*

We're talking about a *massive* transformation here, billions of
neurons and trillions of synapses rearranged.  Not just form, but
content - just like a male judo expert would need skills
repatterned to become a female judo expert, so too, you know how to
operate a male brain but not a female brain.  You are the
equivalent of a judo expert at one, but not the other.  You have
*cognitive* reflexes, and consciously learned cognitive skills as
well.

If I fell asleep and woke up as a true woman - not in body, but in
brain - I don't think I'd call her "me".  The change is too sharp,
if it happens all at once.

Transform the brain gradually?  Hm... now we have to design the
*intermediate stages,* and make sure the intermediate stages make
self-consistent sense.  Evolution built and optimized a
self-consistent male brain and a self-consistent female brain; it
didn't design the parts to be stable during an intermediate
transition between the two.  Maybe you've got to redesign other
parts of the brain just to keep working through the transition.

What happens when, as a woman, you think back to your memory of
looking at Angelina Jolie photos as a man?  How do you
*empathize*with your *past self* of the opposite sex?  Do you flee
in horror from the person you were?  Are all your life's memories
distant and alien things?  How can you *remember*, when your memory
is a recorded activation pattern for neural circuits that no longer
exist in their old forms?  Do we rewrite all your memories, too?

Well... maybe we could *retain* your old male brainware through the
transformation, and set up a *dual* system of male and female
circuits... such that you are currently female, but retain the
ability to recall and empathize with your past memories as if they
were running on the same male brainware that originally laid them
down...

Sounds complicated, doesn't it?  It seems that to transform a male
brain into someone who can be a real female, we can't just rewrite
you as a female brain.  That just kills you and replaces you with
someone re-imagined as a different person.  Instead we have to
rewrite you as a more complex brain with a novel, non-ancestral
architecture that can cross-operate in realtime between male and
female modes, so that a female can process male memories with a
remembered context that includes the male brainware that laid them
down.

To make you female, and yet still you, we have to step outside the
human design space in order to preserve continuity with your male
self.

And when your little adventure is over and you go back to being a
man - *if* you still want to, because even if your past self wanted
to go back afterward, why should that desire be binding on your
present self? - then we've got to *keep* the dual architecture so
you don't throw up every time you remember what you did on your
vacation.

Assuming you *did*have sex as a woman, rather than fending off all
comers because because they didn't look like they were interested
in a long-term relationship.

But then, you probably *would*experiment.  You'll never have been a
little girl, and you won't remember going through high school where
any girl who slept with a boy was called a slut by the other
girls.  You'll remember a *very atypical past* for a woman - but
there's no way to fix *that*while keeping you the same person.

And all that was just what it takes to ranma around *within*
human-space, from the male pole to the female pole and back again.

What if you wanted to move outside the human space entirely?

In one sense, a sex change is admittedly close to a worst-case
scenario: a fixed target *not* optimized for an easy transition
from your present location; involving, not just *new* brain areas,
but massive coordinated *changes*to brain areas already in place.

It might be a lot easier to just add one more emotion to those
already there.  Maybe.

In another sense, though, a sex change is close to a best-case
scenario: the prototype of your destination is already extensively
tested as a coherent mind, and known to function well within a
human society that already has a place for it (including companions
to talk to).

It might be a lot harder to enter uncharted territory.  Maybe.

I'm not saying - of course - that it could never, ever be done. 
But it's another instance of the great chicken-and-egg dilemma that
is the whole story of present-day humanity, the great challenge
that intelligent life faces in its flowering: growing up is a
grownup-level problem.  You could try to build a cleanly-designed
artificial grownup (self-improving Friendly AI) to foresee the
pathway ahead and chart out a nonfatal course.  Or you could plunge
ahead yourself, and hope that you grew faster than your problems
did.

It's the same core challenge either way: growing up is an adult
problem.  There are difficult ways out of this trap, but no easy
ones; [extra-ordinary](/lw/uo/make_an_extraordinary_effort/)
solutions, but no ordinary ones.  People ask me why I take all
these difficulties upon myself.  It's because all the easier ways,
once you examine them in enough fine detail, turn out to be
illusions, or contain just as much difficulty themselves - the same
sort of hidden difficulty as "I'd like to try being the opposite
sex for a week".

It seems to me that there is just an irreducible residue of very
hard problems associated with an adult version of humankind ever
coming into being.

And emotions would be among the most dangerous targets of
meddling.  Make the wrong shift, and you won't *want* to change
back.

We can't keep these exact human emotions forever.  Anyone want to
still want to eat chocolate-chip cookies when the last sun grows
cold?  I didn't think so.

But if we replace our emotions with random die-rolls, then we'll
end up
[wanting to do what is prime, instead of what's right](/lw/sy/sorting_pebbles_into_correct_heaps/).

S*ome* emotional changes can be desirable, but random replacement
seems likely to be undesirable on average.  So there must be
[criteria that distinguish](/lw/vm/lawful_creativity/) good
emotional changes from bad emotional changes.  What are they?
