
# Complex Novelty

****From Greg Egan's *Permutation City*:

    The workshop abutted a warehouse full of table legs - one
hundred and sixty-two thousand, three hundred and twenty-nine, so
far.  Peer could imagine nothing more satisfying than reaching the
two hundred thousand mark - although he knew it was likely that
he'd change his mind and abandon the workshop before that happened;
new vocations were imposed by his exoself at random intervals, but
statistically, the next one was overdue.  Immediately before taking
up woodwork, he'd passionately devoured all the higher mathematics
texts in the central library, run all the tutorial software, and
then personally contributed several important new results to group
theory - untroubled by the fact that none of the Elysian
mathematicians would ever be aware of his work.  Before that, he'd
written over three hundred comic operas, with librettos in Italian,
French and English - and staged most of them, with puppet
performers and audience.  Before that, he'd patiently studied the
structure and biochemistry of the human brain for sixty-seven
years; towards the end he had fully grasped, to his own
satisfaction, the nature of the process of consciousness.  Every
one of these pursuits had been utterly engrossing, and satisfying,
at the time.  He'd even been interested in the Elysians, once.  
    No longer.  He preferred to think about table legs.

Among science fiction authors, Greg Egan is my favorite; of Greg
Egan's books, *Permutation City* is my favorite; and this
particular passage in *Permutation City,* more than any of the
others, I find utterly horrifying.

If this were all the hope the future held, I don't know if I could
bring myself to try.  Small wonder that people don't
[sign up for cryonics](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/12/you-only-live-twice.html),
if even SF writers think this is the best we can do.

You could think of this whole series on Fun Theory as my reply to
Greg Egan - a list of the ways that his human-level uploaded
civilizations Fail At Fun.  (And yes, this series will also explain
what's wrong with the Culture and how to fix it.)



We won't get to *all* of Peer's problems today - but really. 
*Table legs?*

I could see myself carving *one* table leg, maybe, if there was
something non-obvious to learn from the experience.  But not
162,329.

In *Permutation City*, Peer modified himself to find
table-leg-carving fascinating and worthwhile and pleasurable.  But
really, at *that*point, you might as well modify yourself to get
pleasure from playing Tic-Tac-Toe, or lie motionless on a pillow as
a limbless eyeless blob having fantastic orgasms.  It's not a
worthy use of a human-level intelligence.

Worse, carving the 162,329th table leg doesn't *teach*you anything
that you didn't already know from carving 162,328 previous table
legs.  A mind that changes so little in life's course is scarcely
experiencing time.

But apparently, once you do a little group theory, write a few
operas, and solve the mystery of consciousness, there isn't much
else worth doing in life: you've
*exhausted the entirety of Fun Space* down to the level of table
legs.

Is this plausible?  How large is Fun Space?

Let's say you were a human-level intelligence who'd never seen a
Rubik's Cube, or anything remotely like it.  As Hofstadter
describes in two whole chapters of *Metamagical Themas,* there's a
*lot* that intelligent human novices can learn from the Cube - like
the whole notion of an "operator" or "macro", a sequence of moves
that accomplishes a limited swap with few side effects.  Parity,
search, impossibility -

So you learn these things in the long, difficult course of solving
the *first*scrambled Rubik's Cube you encounter.  The
*second*scrambled Cube - solving it might still be difficult, still
be enough fun to be worth doing.  But you won't have quite the same
pleasurable shock of encountering something as new, and strange,
and interesting as the first Cube was unto you.

Even if you encounter a variant of the Rubik's Cube - like a 4x4x4
Cube instead of a 3x3x3 Cube - or even a
[Rubik's Tesseract](http://www.superliminal.com/cube/cube.htm) (a
3x3x3x3 Cube in four dimensions) - it still won't contain quite as
much fun as the first Cube you ever saw.  I haven't tried mastering
the Rubik's Tesseract myself, so I don't know if there are added
secrets in four dimensions - but it doesn't seem likely to teach me
anything as fundamental as "operators", "side effects", or
"parity".

(I was quite young when I encountered a Rubik's Cube in a toy
cache, and so that actually *is* where I discovered such concepts. 
I tried that Cube on and off for months, without solving it. 
Finally I took out a book from the library on Cubes, applied the
macros there, and discovered that this particular Cube was
*unsolvable*- it had been disassembled and reassembled into an
impossible position.  I think I was faintly annoyed.)

Learning is fun, but it *uses up* fun: you can't have the same
stroke of genius twice.  Insight is insight because it makes future
problems *less difficult,* and "deep" because it applies to many
such problems.

And the smarter you are, the faster you learn - so the smarter you
are, the less *total*fun you can have.  Chimpanzees can occupy
themselves for a lifetime at tasks that would bore you or I to
tears.  Clearly, the solution to Peer's difficulty is to become
stupid enough that carving table legs is *difficult* again - and so
lousy at generalizing that every table leg is a new and exciting
challenge -

Well, but hold on:  If you're a chimpanzee, you can't understand
the Rubik's Cube *at all.*  At least I'm willing to bet against
anyone training a chimpanzee to solve one - let alone a chimpanzee
solving it spontaneously - let alone a chimpanzee understanding the
deep concepts like "operators", "side effects", and "parity".

I could be wrong here, but it seems to me, on the whole, that when
you look at the number of ways that chimpanzees have fun, and the
number of ways that humans have fun,
*that Human Fun Space is larger than Chimpanzee Fun Space.*

And not in a way that increases just *linearly*with brain size,
either.

The space of problems that are Fun to a given brain,
*will*definitely be smaller than the exponentially increasing space
of all possible problems that brain can *represent*.  We are
interested only in the borderland between triviality and
impossibility - problems difficult enough to worthily occupy our
minds, yet tractable enough to be worth challenging. 
([What *looks* "impossible" is not always impossible](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/10/try-persevere.html),
but the border is still *somewhere* even if we can't see it at a
glance - there are some problems so difficult you can't even learn
much from failing.)

An even stronger constraint is that if you do something many times,
you ought to learn from the experience and get better - many
problems of the same *difficulty*will have the same "learnable
lessons" embedded in them, so that doing one consumes some of the
fun of others.

As you learn new things, and your skills improve, problems will get
easier.  Some will move off the border of the possible and the
impossible, and become too easy to be interesting.

But *others*will move from the territory of impossibility into the
borderlands of mere extreme difficulty.  It's easier to invent
group theory if you've solved the Rubik's Cube first.  There are
insights you can't have without prerequisite insights.

If you get smarter over time (larger brains, improved mind designs)
that's a still higher octave of the same phenomenon.  (As best I
can grasp the Law, there are insights you can't understand
*at all*without having a brain of sufficient size and sufficient
design.  Humans are not maximal in this sense, and I don't think
there should be any maximum - but that's a rather deep topic, which
I shall not explore further in this blog post.  Note that Greg Egan
seems to explicitly believe the reverse - that humans can
understand *anything understandable* - which explains a lot.)

One suspects that in a better-designed existence, the eudaimonic
rate of intelligence increase would be bounded below by the need to
*integrate* the loot of your adventures - to incorporate new
knowledge and new skills *efficiently*, without swamping your mind
in a sea of disconnected memories and associations - to manipulate
larger, more powerful concepts that generalize more of your
accumulated life-knowledge at once.

And one also suspects that part of the poignancy of transhuman
existence will be having to *move on* from your current level - get
smarter, leaving old challenges behind - before you've explored
more than an infinitesimal fraction of the Fun Space for a mind of
your level.  If, like me, you play through computer games trying to
slay every single monster so you can collect every single
experience point, this is as much tragedy as an improved existence
could possibly need.

Fun Space can increase much more slowly than the space of
representable problems, and still overwhelmingly swamp the amount
of time you could bear to spend as a mind of a fixed level.  Even
if Fun Space grows at some ridiculously tiny rate like N-squared -
bearing in mind that the actual raw space of representable problems
goes as 2^N^ - we're still talking about "way more fun than you can
handle".

If you consider the loot of every human adventure - everything that
was ever learned about science, and everything that was ever
learned about people, and all the original stories ever told, and
all the original games ever invented, and all the plots and
conspiracies that were ever launched, and all the personal
relationships ever raveled, and all the ways of existing that were
ever tried, and all the glorious epiphanies of wisdom that were
ever minted -

- and you deleted all the duplicates, keeping only one of every
lesson that had the same moral -

- how long would you have to stay human, to collect *every* gold
coin in the dungeons of history?

Would it all fit into a single human brain, without that mind
completely disintegrating under the weight of unrelated
associations?  And even then, would you have come close to
exhausting the space of *human possibility,*which we've surely not
finished exploring?

This is all sounding like suspiciously good news.  So let's turn it
around. Is there any way that Fun Space could fail to grow, and
instead collapse?

Suppose there's only so many deep insights you *can* have on the
order of "parity", and that you collect them all, and then math is
never again as exciting as it was in the beginning.  And that you
then exhaust the shallower insights, and the trivial insights,
until finally you're left with the delightful shock of "Gosh wowie
gee willickers, the product of 845 and 109 is 92105, I didn't know
that logical truth before."

Well - obviously, if you sit around and catalogue all the deep
insights *known*to you to exist, you're going to end up with a
bounded list.  And equally obviously, if you declared, "This is all
there is, and all that will ever be," you'd be taking an
unjustified step.  (Though I fully expect some people out there to
step up and say how it seems to them that they've already started
to run out of available insights that are as deep as the ones they
remember from their childhood.  And I fully expect that - compared
to the sort of person who makes such a pronouncement - I
*personally*will have collected more additional insights than they
believe exist in the whole remaining realm of possibility.)

Can we say anything more on this subject of fun insights that might
exist, but that we haven't yet found?

The obvious thing to do is start appealing to Godel, but Godelian
arguments are dangerous tools to employ in debate.  It does seem to
me that Godelian arguments weigh in the general direction of
"inexhaustible deep insights", but inconclusively and only by loose
analogies.

For example, the
[Busy-Beaver(N)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Busy_beaver) problem
asks for the longest running time of a Turing machine with no more
than N states.  The Busy Beaver problem is uncomputable - there is
no fixed Turing machine that computes it for all N - because if you
knew all the Busy Beaver numbers, you would have an infallible way
of telling whether a Turing machine halts; just run it up for as
long as the longest-running Turing machine of that size.

The human species has managed to figure out and prove the Busy
Beaver numbers up to 4, and they are:

BB(1):  1  
BB(2):  6  
BB(3):  21  
BB(4):  107

Busy-Beaver 5 is believed to be 47,176,870.

The current lower bound on Busy-Beaver(6) is \~2.5 × 10^2879^.

This function *provably*grows faster than any compact specification
you can imagine.  Which would seem to argue that each new Turing
machine is exhibiting a new and interesting kind of behavior. 
Given infinite time, you would even be able to *notice*this
behavior.  You won't ever know for certain that you've discovered
the Busy-Beaver *champion*for any given N, after finite time; but
conversely, you will *notice* the Busy Beaver champion for any N
after some finite time.

Yes, this is an *unimaginably long* time - one of the few occasions
where the word "unimaginable" is literally correct.  We can't
*actually* do this unless reality works the way it does in Greg
Egan novels.  But the point is that in the limit of infinite time
we can point to *something*sorta like "an infinite sequence of
*learnable*deep insights not reducible to any of their predecessors
or to any learnable abstract summary".  It's not conclusive, but
it's at least *suggestive.*

Now you could still look at that and say, "I don't think my life
would be an adventure of neverending excitement if I spent until
the end of time trying to figure out the weird behaviors of
slightly larger Tuing machines."

Well - as I said before, Peer is doing more than *one*thing wrong. 
Here I've dealt with only one sort of dimension of Fun Space - the
dimension of how much *novelty* we can expect to find available to
introduce into our fun.

But even on the arguments given so far... I don't call it
conclusive, but it seems like sufficient reason to
*hope and expect* that our descendants and future selves won't
exhaust Fun Space to the point that there is literally nothing left
to do but carve the 162,329th table leg.
