
# Living By Your Own Strength

*"Myself, and Morisato-san... we want to live together by our own strength."*

Jared Diamond once called agriculture
"[the worst mistake in the history of the human race](http://www.environnement.ens.fr/perso/claessen/agriculture/mistake_jared_diamond.pdf)". 
Farmers could grow more wheat than hunter-gatherers could collect
nuts, but the evidence seems pretty conclusive that agriculture
traded quality of life for quantity of life.  One study showed that
the farmers in an area were six inches shorter and seven years
shorter-lived than their hunter-gatherer predecessors - even though
the farmers were more numerous.

I don't know if I'd call agriculture a *mistake*.  But one should
at least be aware of the downsides. 
[Policy debates should not appear one-sided](/lw/gz/policy_debates_should_not_appear_onesided/).

In the same spirit -

Once upon a time, our hunter-gatherer ancestors strung their own
bows, wove their own baskets, whittled their own flutes.

And part of our alienation from that
[environment of evolutionary adaptedness](http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Environment_of_evolutionary_adaptedness),
is the number of tools we use that we don't understand and couldn't
make for ourselves.



You can look back on *Overcoming Bias*, and see that I've always
been suspicious of borrowed strength.  (Even before I understood
the source of Robin's and my disagreement about the Singularity,
that is.)  In
[Guessing the Teacher's Password](/lw/iq/guessing_the_teachers_password/)
I talked about the (well-known) problem in which schools end up
teaching verbal behavior rather than real knowledge.  In
[Truly Part of You](/lw/la/truly_part_of_you/) I suggested one test
for false knowledge:  Imagine deleting a fact from your mind, and
ask if it would grow back.

I know many ways to prove the Pythagorean Theorem, including at
least one proof that is purely visual and can be seen at a glance. 
But if you deleted the Pythagorean Theorem from my mind *entirely,*
would I have enough math skills left to grow it back the next time
I needed it?  I hope so - certainly I've solved math problems that
*seem* tougher than that, what with benefit of hindsight and all. 
But, as I'm not an AI, I can't actually switch off the memories and
associations, and test myself in that way.

Wielding someone else's strength to do things beyond your own
understanding - that really *is* as dangerous as the Deeply Wise
phrasing makes it sound.

I observed in
[Failing to Learn from History](/lw/iz/failing_to_learn_from_history/)
(musing on my
[childhood foolishness](/lw/u2/the_sheer_folly_of_callow_youth/) in
offering a
[mysterious answer to a mysterious question](/lw/iu/mysterious_answers_to_mysterious_questions/)): 
"If only I had *personally* postulated astrological mysteries and
then discovered Newtonian mechanics, postulated alchemical
mysteries and then discovered chemistry, postulated vitalistic
mysteries and then discovered biology.  I would have thought of my
Mysterious Answer and said to myself: 
*No way am I falling for that again.**"*

At that point in my childhood, I'd been *handed* some techniques of
rationality but I didn't exactly *own* them.  Borrowing someone
else's knowledge really doesn't give you anything *remotely*like
the same power level required to discover that knowledge for
yourself.

Would Isaac Newton have remained a mystic, even in that earlier
era, if he'd *lived*the lives of Galileo and Archimedes instead of
just reading about them?  If he'd *personally*seen the planets
reduced from gods to spheres in a telescope?  If he'd
*personally*fought that whole war against ignorance and mystery
that had to be fought, before Isaac Newton could be handed math and
science as a start to his further work?

We stand on the shoulders of giants, and in doing so, the power
that we wield is far out of proportion to the power that we could
generate for ourselves.  This is true even of our revolutionaries. 
And yes, we couldn't begin to support this world if people could
only use their own strength.  Even so, we are losing something.

That thought occurred to me, reading about the Manhattan Project,
and the petition that the physicists signed to avoid dropping the
atomic bomb on Japan.  It was too late, of course; they'd already
built the bombs and handed them to the military, and they couldn't
take back that gift.  And so nuclear weapons passed into the hands
of politicians, who could never have created such a thing through
their own strength...

Not that I'm saying the world would necessarily have been a better
place, if physicists had possessed sole custody of ICBMs.  What
does a physicist know about international diplomacy, or war?  And
it's not as if Leo Szilard - who first thought of the fission chain
reaction - had personally invented science; he too was using powers
beyond his own strength.  And it's not as if the physicists on the
Manhattan Project raised the money to pay for their salaries and
their materials; they were borrowing the strength of the
politicians...

But if no one had been able to use nuclear weapons without, say,
possessing the discipline of a scientist *and* the discipline of a
politician - without personally knowing enough to construct an
atomic bomb *and* make friends - the world might have been a
slightly safer place.

And if nobody had been able to construct an atomic bomb without
first discovering for themselves the nature and existence of
physics, then we would have been *much*safer from atomic bombs,
because no one would have been able to build them until they were
two hundred years old.

With humans leaving the game after just seventy years, we couldn't
support this world using only our own strengths.  But we have
traded quality of insight for quantity of insight.

It does sometimes seem to me that many of this world's problems,
stem from our using powers that aren't appropriate to
seventy-year-olds.

And there is a higher level of strength-ownership, which no human
being has yet achieved.  Even when we run, we're just using the
muscles that evolution built for us.  Even when we think, we're
just using the brains that evolution built for us.

I'm not suggesting that people should
[create themselves from scratch without a starting point](/lw/rc/the_ultimate_source/). 
Just pointing out that it would be a different world if we
understood our own brains and could redesign our own legs.  As
*yet*there's no human "rationalist" or "scientist", whatever they
know about "how to think", who could actually *build a rational AI*
- which shows you the limits of our self-understanding.

This is not the sort of thing that I'd suggest as an immediate
alteration.  I'm not suggesting that people should *instantly* on a
silver platter be given full knowledge of how their own brains work
and the ability to redesign their own legs.  Because maybe people
will be better off if they aren't *given*that kind of power, but
rather have to work out the answer for *themselves.*

Just in terms of anomie versus fun, there's a big difference
between being able to do things for yourself, and having to rely on
other people to do them for you.  (Even if you're doing them with a
brain you never designed yourself.)

I don't know if it's a principle that would stay until the end of
time, to the children's children.  Maybe better-designed minds
could handle opaque tools without the anomie.

But it is part of the commonly retold prophecy of Artificial
Intelligence and the Age of the Machine, that this era must be
accompanied by *greater* reliance on things outside yourself,
*more* incomprehensible tools into which you have *less*insight and
*less* part in their creation.

Such a prophecy is not surprising.  That *is*the way the trend has
gone so far, in our culture that is too busy staying alive to
optimize for fun.  From the fire-starting tools that you built
yourself, to the village candleseller, and then from the
candleseller to the electric light that runs on strange
mathematical principles and is powered by a distant generator... 
we are surrounded by things outside ourselves and strengths outside
our understanding; we need them to stay alive, or we buy them
because it's easier that way.

But with a sufficient surplus of power, you could start doing
things the eudaimonic way.  Start rethinking the life experience as
a road to internalizing new strengths, instead of just trying to
keep people alive efficiently.

A Friendly AI doesn't have to be a continuation of existing
trends.  It's not the Machine.  It's not the alien force of
technology.  It's not mechanizing a factory.  It's not a new gadget
for sale.  That's not where the shape comes from. What it *is*- is
not easy to explain; but I'm reminded of doc Smith's description of
the Lens as "the physical manifestation of a purely philosophical
concept".  That philosophical concept doesn't have to manifest as
new buttons to press -
[if, on reflection, that's not what we would want](http://singinst.org/upload/CEV.html).
