
# Sensual Experience

Modern day gamemakers are constantly working on higher-resolution,
more realistic graphics; more immersive sounds - but they're a long
*long*way off real life.

Pressing the "W" key to run forward as a graphic of a hungry tiger
bounds behind you, just doesn't seem quite as *sensual*as running
frantically across the savanna with your own legs, breathing in
huge gasps and pumping your arms as the sun beats down on your
shoulders, the grass brushes your shins, and the air whips around
you with the wind of your passage.

Don't mistake me for a luddite; I'm not saying the technology
*can't* get that good.  I'm saying it hasn't gotten that good
*yet.*

Failing to escape the computer tiger would also have fewer
*long-term consequences* than failing to escape a biological tiger
- it would be less a part of the total story of your life - meaning
you're also likely to be less *emotionally* involved.  But that's a
topic for another post.  Today's post is just about the sensual
quality of the experience.

Sensual experience isn't a question of some mysterious quality that
only the "real world" possesses.  A computer screen is as *real* as
a tiger, after all.  Whatever *is,* is real.

But the pattern of the pseudo-tiger, inside the computer chip, is
nowhere near as complex as a biological tiger; it offers far fewer
modes in which to interact.  And the sensory bandwidth between you
and the computer's pseudo-world is relatively low; and the
information passing along it isn't in quite the right format.

It's not a question of computer tigers being "virtual" or
"simulated", and therefore somehow a separate magisterium. But with
present technology, and the way your brain is presently set up,
you'd have *a lot more neurons* involved in running away from a
biological tiger.

Running would fill your whole vision with motion, not just a flat
rectangular screen - which translates into more square centimeters
of visual cortex getting actively engaged.

The graphics on a computer monitor try to trigger your sense of
spatial motion (residing in the parietal cortex, btw).  But they're
presenting the information differently from its native *format*-
without binocular vision, for example, and without your vestibular
senses indicating true motion.  So the sense of *motion* isn't
likely to be quite the same, what it would be if you were running.

And there's the sense of touch that indicates the wind on your
skin; and the proprioceptive sensors that respond to the position
of your limbs; and the nerves that record the strain on your
muscles.  There's a whole strip of sensorimotor cortex running
along the top of your brain, that would be much more intensely
involved in "real" running.

It's a very old observation, that *Homo sapiens* was made to hunt
and gather on the savanna, rather than work in an office. 
Civilization and its discontents...  But alienation needs a causal
mechanism; it doesn't just happen by magic.  Physics is physics, so
it's not that one environment is less real than another.  But our
*brains*are more adapted to *interfacing*with jungles than computer
code.

Writing a complicated computer program carries its own triumphs and
failures, heights of exultation and pits of despair.  But is it the
same sort of *sensual* experience as, say, riding a motorcycle? 
I've never actually ridden a motorcycle, but I expect not.

I've experienced the *exhilaration* of getting a program right on
the dozenth try after finally spotting the problem.  I doubt a
random moment of a motorcycle ride actually feels *better* than
that.  But still, my hunter-gatherer ancestors never wrote computer
programs.  And so my mind's grasp on code is maintained using more
rarefied, more abstract, more general capabilities - which means
less sensual involvement.

Doesn't computer programming *deserve* to be as much of a sensual
experience as motorcycle riding?  Some time ago, a relative once
asked me if I thought that computer programming could use all my
talents; I at once replied, "There is *no limit* to the talent you
can use in computer programming."  It's as close as human beings
have ever come to playing with the raw stuff of creation - but our
grasp on it is too distant from the jungle.  All our involvement is
through letters on a computer screen.  I win, and I'm happy, but
there's no wind on my face.

If only my ancestors back to the level of my last common ancestor
with a mouse, had constantly faced the challenge of writing
computer programs!  Then I would have brain areas suited to the
task, and programming computers would be more of a sensual
experience...

Perhaps it's not too late to fix the mistake?

If there were something around that was smart enough to rewrite
human brains without breaking them - not a trivial amount of
smartness - then it would be possible to expand the range of things
that are *sensually* fun.

Not just [novel challenges](/lw/wx/complex_novelty/), but novel
high-bandwidth senses and corresponding new brain areas.  Widening
the sensorium to include new vivid, detailed experiences.  And not
neglecting the other half of the equation, high-bandwidth motor
connections - new motor brain areas, to control with subtlety our
new limbs (the parts of the process that we control as our direct
handles on it).

There's a story - old now, but I remember how exciting it was when
the news first came out - about a brain-computer interface for a
"locked-in" patient (who could previously only move his eyes),
connecting control of a computer cursor directly to neurons in his
visual cortex.  It took some training at first for him to use the
cursor - he started out by trying to move his paralyzed arm, which
was the part of the motor cortex they were interfacing, and watched
as the cursor jerked around on the screen.  But after a while, they
asked the patient, "What does it feel like?" and the patient
replied, "It doesn't feel like anything."  He just controlled the
cursor the same sort of way he would have controlled a finger,
except that it wasn't a finger, it was a cursor.

Like most brain modifications, adding new senses is not something
to be done lightly.  Sensual experience too *easily* renders a task
involving.

Consider taste buds.  Recognizing the taste of the same food on
different occasions was very important to our ancestors - it was
how they *learned*what to eat, that extracted regularity.  And our
ancestors also got helpful reinforcement from their taste buds
about what to eat - reinforcement which is now worse than useless,
because of
[the marketing incentive to reverse-engineer tastiness using artificial substances](/lw/h3/superstimuli_and_the_collapse_of_western/). 
By now, it's probably true that at least some people have eaten
162,329 potato chips in their lifetimes.  That's even less novelty
and challenge than
[carving 162,329 table legs](/lw/wx/complex_novelty/).

I'm not saying we should try to eliminate our senses of taste. 
There's a lot to be said for grandfathering in the senses we
started with - it preserves our existing life memories, for
example.  Once you realize how easy it would be for a mind to
collapse into a pleasure center, you start to respect the
"complications" of your goal system a lot more, and be more wary
around "simplifications".

But I do want to nudge people into adopting something of a
questioning attitude toward the senses we have now, rather than
assuming that the existing senses are The Way Things Have Been And
Will Always Be.  A sex organ bears thousands of densely packed
nerves for signal strength, but that signal - however strong -
isn't as *complicated* as the sensations sent out by taste buds. 
Is that really appropriate for one of the most interesting parts of
human existence?  That even a novice chef can create a wider
variety of taste sensations for your tongue, than - well, I'd
better stop there.  But from a fun-theoretic standpoint, the
existing setup is wildly unbalanced in a lot of ways.  It wasn't
*designed* for the sake of eudaimonia.

I conclude with the following cautionary quote from an old IRC
conversation, as a reminder that maybe not *everything*should be a
sensual experience:

<MRAmes\> I want a sensory modality for regular expressions.
