
# Making Beliefs Pay Rent (in Anticipated Experiences)

Thus begins the ancient parable:

*If a tree falls in a forest and no one hears it, does it make a sound? One says, "Yes it does, for it makes vibrations in the air." Another says, "No it does not, for there is no auditory processing in any brain."*

Suppose that, after the tree falls, the two walk into the forest
together. Will one expect to see the tree fallen to the right, and
the other expect to see the tree fallen to the left? Suppose that
before the tree falls, the two leave a sound recorder next to the
tree. Would one, playing back the recorder, expect to hear
something different from the other? Suppose they attach an
electroencephalograph to any brain in the world; would one expect
to see a different trace than the other? Though the two argue, one
saying "No," and the other saying "Yes," they do not anticipate any
different experiences.  The two think they have different models of
the world, but they have no difference with respect to what they
expect will *happen to* them.



It's tempting to try to eliminate this mistake class by insisting
that the only legitimate kind of belief is an anticipation of
sensory experience. But the world does, in fact, contain much that
is not sensed directly. We don't see the atoms underlying the
brick, but the atoms are in fact there. There is a floor beneath
your feet, but you don't *experience* the floor directly; you see
the light *reflected* from the floor, or rather, you see what your
retina and visual cortex have processed of that light. To infer the
floor from seeing the floor is to step back into the unseen causes
of experience. It may seem like a very short and direct step, but
it is still a step.

You stand on top of a tall building, next to a grandfather clock
with an hour, minute, and ticking second hand. In your hand is a
bowling ball, and you drop it off the roof. On which tick of the
clock will you hear the crash of the bowling ball hitting the
ground?

To answer precisely, you must use beliefs like
*Earth's gravity is 9.8 meters per second per second,* and
*This building is around 120 meters tall.* These beliefs are not
wordless anticipations of a sensory experience; they are
verbal-ish, propositional. It probably does not exaggerate much to
describe these two beliefs as sentences made out of words. But
these two beliefs have an inferential *consequence* that is a
direct sensory anticipation - if the clock's second hand is on the
12 numeral when you drop the ball, you anticipate seeing it on the
1 numeral when you hear the crash five seconds later. To anticipate
sensory experiences as precisely as possible, we must process
beliefs that are not anticipations of sensory experience.

It is a great strength of *Homo sapiens* that we can, better than
any other species in the world, learn to model the unseen. It is
also one of our great weak points. Humans often believe in things
that are not only unseen but unreal.

The same brain that builds a network of inferred causes behind
sensory experience, can also build a network of causes that is not
connected to sensory experience, or poorly connected. Alchemists
believed that phlogiston caused fire - we could oversimply their
minds by drawing a little node labeled "Phlogiston", and an arrow
from this node to their sensory experience of a crackling campfire
- but this belief yielded no advance predictions; the link from
phlogiston to experience was always configured after the
experience, rather than constraining the experience in advance. Or
suppose your postmodern English professor teaches you that the
famous writer Wulky Wilkinsen is actually a "post-utopian". What
does this mean you should expect from his books? Nothing. The
belief, if you can call it that, doesn't connect to sensory
experience at all. But you had better remember the propositional
assertion that "Wulky Wilkinsen" has the "post-utopian" attribute,
so you can regurgitate it on the upcoming quiz. Likewise if
"post-utopians" show "colonial alienation"; if the quiz asks
whether Wulky Wilkinsen shows colonial alienation, you'd better
answer yes. The beliefs are connected to each other, though still
not connected to any anticipated experience.

We can build up whole networks of beliefs that are connected only
to each other - call these "floating" beliefs. It is a uniquely
human flaw among animal species, a perversion of *Homo sapiens's*
ability to build more general and flexible belief networks.

The rationalist virtue of *empiricism* consists of constantly
asking which experiences our beliefs predict - or better yet,
prohibit.  Do you believe that phlogiston is the cause of fire? 
Then what do you expect to see happen, because of that? Do you
believe that Wulky Wilkinsen is a post-utopian? Then what do you
expect to see because of that? No, not "colonial alienation";
*what experience will happen to you?* Do you believe that if a tree
falls in the forest, and no one hears it, it still makes a sound?
Then what experience must therefore befall you?

It is even better to ask: what experience *must not* happen to
you?  Do you believe that *elan vital* explains the mysterious
aliveness of living beings?  Then what does this belief *not* allow
to happen - what would definitely falsify this belief? A null
answer means that your belief does not *constrain* experience; it
permits *anything* to happen to you.  It floats.

When you argue a seemingly factual question, always keep in mind
which difference of anticipation you are arguing about. If you
can't find the difference of anticipation, you're probably arguing
about labels in your belief network - or even worse, floating
beliefs, barnacles on your network. If you don't know what
experiences are implied by Wulky Wilkinsen being a post-utopian,
you can go on arguing forever. (You can also publish papers
forever.)

Above all, don't ask what to believe - ask what to anticipate.
Every question of belief should flow from a question of
anticipation, and that question of anticipation should be the
center of the inquiry. Every guess of belief should begin by
flowing to a specific guess of anticipation, and should continue to
pay rent in future anticipations. If a belief turns deadbeat, evict
it.
