
# Making History Available

There is a habit of thought which I call
the*logical fallacy of generalization from fictional evidence,*
which deserves a blog post in its own right, one of these days. 
Journalists who, for example, talk about the *Terminator* movies in
a report on AI, do not usually treat *Terminator* as a prophecy or
fixed truth.  But the movie is recalled - is
[available](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Availability_heuristic) -
as if it were an illustrative historical case.  As if the
journalist had seen it happen on some other planet, so that it
might well happen here.  More on this in Section 6 of
[this paper](http://singinst.org/Biases.pdf).

There is an inverse error to generalizing from fictional evidence:
failing to be sufficiently moved by *historical* evidence.  The
trouble with generalizing from fictional evidence is that it is
fiction - it never actually happened.  It's not drawn from the same
distribution as this, our real universe;
[fiction differs from reality in systematic ways](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/07/tell-your-anti-.html). 
But history *has* happened, and *should* be available.

In our ancestral environment, there were no movies; what you saw
with your own eyes was true.  Is it any wonder that fictions we see
in lifelike moving pictures have too great an impact on us? 
Conversely, things that *really happened,* we encounter as ink on
paper; they happened, but we never *saw* them happen.  We don't
remember them happening to us.

The inverse error is to treat history as mere story, process it
with the same part of your mind that handles the novels you read. 
You may say with your lips that it is "truth", rather than
"fiction", but that doesn't mean you are being moved as much as you
should be.  Many biases involve being insufficiently moved by
[dry, abstract information](/lw/hw/scope_insensitivity/).

Once upon a time, I gave a
[Mysterious Answer](/lw/iu/mysterious_answers_to_mysterious_questions/)
to a mysterious question, not realizing that I was making exactly
the same mistake as astrologers devising mystical explanations for
the stars, or alchemists devising magical properties of matter, or
vitalists postulating an opaque "elan vital" to explain all of
biology.

When
[I finally realized whose shoes I was standing in](/lw/iz/failing_to_learn_from_history/),
there was a sudden shock of unexpected connection with the past.  I
realized that the invention and destruction of vitalism - which I
had only read about in books - had
*actually happened to real people,* who experienced it much the
same way I experienced the invention and destruction of my own
mysterious answer.  And I also realized that if I had actually
*experienced* the past - if I had lived through past scientific
revolutions myself, rather than reading about them in history books
- I probably would *not* have made the same mistake again.  I would
not have come up with *another* mysterious answer; the first
thousand lessons would have hammered home the moral.

So (I thought), to feel sufficiently the force of history, I should
try to approximate the thoughts of an Eliezer who *had* lived
through history - I should try to think as if everything I read
about in history books, had actually happened to me.  (With
appropriate reweighting for the availability bias of history books
- I should remember being a thousand peasants for every ruler.)  I
should immerse myself in history, imagine *living* through eras I
only saw as ink on paper.

Why should I remember the Wright Brothers' first flight?  I was not
there.  But as a rationalist, could I dare to *not* remember, when
the event actually happened?  Is there so much difference between
seeing an event through your eyes - which is actually a causal
chain involving reflected photons, not a direct connection - and
seeing an event through a history book?  Photons and history books
both descend by causal chains from the event itself.

I had to overcome the false amnesia of being born at a particular
time.  I had to recall - make
[available](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Availability_heuristic) -
*all* the memories, not just the memories which, by mere
coincidence, belonged to myself and my own era.

The Earth became older, of a sudden.

To my former memory, the United States had always existed - there
was never a time when there was no United States.  I had not
remembered, until that time, how the Roman Empire rose, and brought
peace and order, and lasted through so many centuries, until I
forgot that things had ever been otherwise; and yet the Empire
fell, and barbarians overran my city, and the learning that I had
possessed was lost.  The modern world became more fragile to my
eyes; it was not the first modern world.

So many mistakes, made over and over and *over* again, because I
did not remember making them, in every era I never lived...

And to think, people sometimes wonder if overcoming bias is
important.

Don't you remember how many times your biases have killed you?  You
don't?  I've noticed that sudden amnesia often follows a fatal
mistake.  But take it from me, it happened.  I remember; I wasn't
there.

So the next time you doubt the strangeness of the future, remember
how you were born in a hunter-gatherer tribe ten thousand years
ago, when no one knew of Science at all.  Remember how you were
shocked, to the depths of your being, when Science explained the
great and terrible sacred mysteries that you once revered so
highly.  Remember how you once believed that you could fly by
eating the right mushrooms, and then you accepted with
disappointment that you would never fly, and then you flew. 
Remember how you had always thought that slavery was right and
proper, and then you changed your mind. 
[Don't imagine how you *could* have predicted the change](/lw/il/hindsight_bias/),
for that is amnesia.  *Remember* that, in fact, you did not guess. 
Remember how, century after century, the world changed in ways you
did not guess.

Maybe then you will be less shocked by what happens next.
