
# Professing and Cheering

I once attended a panel on the topic, "Are science and religion
compatible?" One of the women on the panel, a pagan, held forth
interminably upon how she believed that the Earth had been created
when a giant primordial cow was born into the primordial abyss, who
licked a primordial god into existence, whose descendants killed a
primordial giant and used its corpse to create the Earth, etc. The
tale was long, and detailed, and more absurd than the Earth being
supported on the back of a giant turtle. And the speaker clearly
knew enough science to know this.

I still find myself struggling for words to describe what I saw as
this woman spoke. She spoke with... pride? Self-satisfaction? A
deliberate flaunting of herself?



The woman went on describing her creation myth for what seemed like
forever, but was probably only five minutes. That strange
pride/satisfaction/flaunting clearly had something to do with her
*knowing* that her beliefs were scientifically outrageous. And it
wasn't that she hated science; as a panelist she professed that
religion and science were compatible. She even talked about how it
was quite understandable that the Vikings talked about a primordial
abyss, given the land in which they lived - explained away her own
religion! - and yet nonetheless insisted this was what she
"believed", said with peculiar satisfaction.

I'm not sure that Daniel Dennett's concept of
"[belief in belief](/lw/i4/belief_in_belief/)" stretches to cover
this event. It was weirder than that. She didn't recite her
creation myth with the fanatical faith of someone who needs to
reassure herself. She didn't act like she expected us, the
audience, to be convinced - or like she needed our belief to
validate her.

Dennett, in addition to suggesting belief in belief, has also
suggested that much of what is called "religious belief" should
really be studied as "religious profession". Suppose an alien
anthropologist studied a group of postmodernist English students
who all seemingly *believed* that Wulky Wilkensen was a
post-utopian author. The appropriate question may not be "Why do
the students all believe this strange belief?" but "Why do they all
write this strange sentence on quizzes?" Even if a sentence is
essentially meaningless, you can still know when you are supposed
to chant the response aloud.

I think Dennett may be slightly too cynical in suggesting that
religious profession is *just* saying the belief aloud - most
people are honest enough that, if they say a religious statement
aloud, they will also feel obligated to say the verbal sentence
into their own stream of consciousness.

But even the concept of "religious profession" doesn't seem to
cover the pagan woman's claim to believe in the primordial cow. If
you had to profess a religious belief to satisfy a priest, or
satisfy a co-religionist - heck, to satisfy your own self-image as
a religious person - you would have to *pretend*to believe
*much more convincingly* than this woman was doing. As she recited
her tale of the primordial cow, with that same strange flaunting
pride, she wasn't even *trying* to be persuasive - wasn't even
trying to convince us that she took her own religion seriously. I
think that's the part that so took me aback. I know people who
believe they believe ridiculous things, but when they profess them,
they'll spend much more effort to convince themselves that they
take their beliefs seriously.

It finally occurred to me that this woman wasn't trying to convince
us or even convince herself. Her recitation of the creation story
wasn't *about* the creation of the world at all. Rather, by
launching into a five-minute diatribe about the primordial cow, she
was *cheering* *for paganism,* like holding up a banner at a
football game. A banner saying
"[GO BLUES](/lw/gt/a_fable_of_science_and_politics/)" isn't a
statement of fact, or an attempt to persuade; it doesn't have to be
convincing - it's a cheer.

That strange flaunting pride... it was like she was marching naked
in a gay pride parade. (Incidentally, I'd have no objection if she
*had* marched naked in a gay pride parade. Lesbianism is not
something that [truth can destroy](/lw/hp/feeling_rational/).) It
wasn't just a cheer, like marching, but an outrageous cheer, like
marching naked - believing that she couldn't be arrested or
criticized, because she was doing it for her pride parade.

That's why it mattered to her that what she was saying was beyond
ridiculous. If she'd tried to make it sound more plausible, it
would have been like putting on clothes.
