
# "Science" as Curiosity-Stopper

Imagine that I, in full view of live television cameras, raised my
hands and chanted *abracadabra* and caused a brilliant light to be
born, flaring in empty space beyond my outstretched hands.  Imagine
that I committed this act of blatant, unmistakeable sorcery under
the full supervision of James Randi and all skeptical armies. Most
people, I think, would be *fairly curious* as to what was going
on.

But now suppose instead that I don't go on television.  I do not
wish to share the power, nor the truth behind it. I want to keep my
sorcery secret.  And yet I also want to cast my spells whenever and
wherever I please. I want to cast my brilliant flare of light so
that I can read a book on the train - without anyone becoming
curious.  Is there a spell that stops curiosity?

Yes indeed!  Whenever anyone asks "How did you do that?", I just
say "Science!"

It's [not a real explanation](/lw/ip/fake_explanations/), so much
as a [curiosity-stopper](/lw/it/semantic_stopsigns/). It doesn't
tell you whether the light will brighten or fade, change color in
hue or saturation, and it certainly doesn't tell you how to make a
similar light yourself. You don't actually *know* anything more
than you knew before I said the
[magic word](/lw/iq/guessing_the_teachers_password/). But you turn
away, satisfied that nothing unusual is going on.

Better yet, the same trick works with a standard light switch.

Flip a switch and a light bulb turns on.  Why?

In school, one is taught that the
[password](/lw/iq/guessing_the_teachers_password/) to the light
bulb is "Electricity!"  By now, I hope, you're wary of marking the
light bulb "understood" on such a basis.  Does saying
"Electricity!" let you do calculations that will control your
anticipation of experience?  There is, at the least, a great deal
more to learn.  (Physicists should ignore this paragraph and
substitute a problem in
[evolutionary theory](/lw/kr/an_alien_god/), where the substance of
the theory is again in calculations that few people know how to
perform.)

If you thought the light bulb was *scientifically inexplicable,* it
would seize the *entirety* of your attention.  You would drop
whatever else you were doing, and focus on that light bulb.

But what does the phrase "scientifically explicable" mean?  It
means that someone *else* knows how the light bulb works.  When you
are told the light bulb is "scientifically explicable", you don't
know more than you knew earlier; you don't know whether the light
bulb will brighten or fade.  But because someone *else* knows, it
devalues the knowledge in your eyes.  You become less curious.

Since this is an econblog, someone out there is bound to say, "If
the light bulb were unknown to science, you could gain fame and
fortune by investigating it."  But I'm not talking about greed. 
I'm not talking about career ambition.  I'm talking about the raw
emotion of curiosity - the feeling of being intrigued.  Why should
*your* curiosity be diminished because someone *else,* not you,
knows how the light bulb works?  Is this not spite?  It's not
enough for *you* to know; other people must also be ignorant, or
you won't be happy?

There are goods that knowledge may serve besides curiosity, such as
the social utility of technology.  For these instrumental goods, it
matters whether some other entity in local space already knows. 
But for my own curiosity, why should it matter? 

Besides, consider the consequences if you permit "Someone else
knows the answer" to function as a curiosity-stopper.  One day you
walk into your living room and see a giant green elephant,
seemingly hovering in midair, surrounded by an aura of silver
light.

"What the heck?" you say.

And a voice comes from above the elephant, saying, "SOMEONE ELSE
ALREADY KNOWS WHY THIS ELEPHANT IS HERE."

"Oh," you say, "in that case, never mind," and walk on to the
kitchen.

I don't know the grand unified theory for this universe's laws of
physics.  I also don't know much about human anatomy with the
exception of the brain.  I couldn't point out on my body where my
kidneys are, and I can't recall offhand what my liver does.  (I am
not proud of this.  Alas, with all the math I need to study, I'm
not likely to learn anatomy anytime soon.)

Should I, so far as *curiosity* is concerned, be more intrigued by
my ignorance of the ultimate laws of physics, than the fact that I
don't know much about what goes on inside my own body?

If I raised my hands and cast a light spell, you would be
intrigued.  Should you be any *less* intrigued by the very fact
that I raised my hands?  When you raise your arm and wave a hand
around, this act of will is coordinated by (among other brain
areas) your cerebellum.  I bet you don't know how the cerebellum
works.  *I* know a little - though only the gross details, not
enough to perform calculations... but so what?  What does that
matter, if *you* don't know?  Why should there be a double standard
of curiosity for sorcery and hand motions?

Look at yourself in the mirror.  Do you know what you're looking
at?  Do you know what looks out from behind your eyes?  Do you know
what you are?  Some of that answer, Science knows, and some of it
Science does not.  But why should that distinction matter to your
curiosity, if *you* don't know?

Do you know how your knees work?  Do you know how your shoes were
made?  Do you know why your computer monitor glows?  Do you know
why water is wet?

The world around you is full of puzzles.  Prioritize, if you must. 
But do not complain that cruel Science has emptied the world of
mystery.  With reasoning such as that, I could get you to overlook
an elephant in your living room.
