
# Your Strength as a Rationalist

(The following happened to me in an IRC chatroom, long enough ago
that I was still hanging around in IRC chatrooms.  Time has fuzzed
the memory and my report may be imprecise.)

So there I was, in an IRC chatroom, when someone reports that a
friend of his needs medical advice.  His friend says that he's been
having sudden chest pains, so he called an ambulance, and the
ambulance showed up, but the paramedics told him it was nothing,
and left, and now the chest pains are getting worse.  What should
his friend do?

I was confused by this story.  I remembered reading about homeless
people in New York who would call ambulances just to be taken
someplace warm, and how the paramedics always had to take them to
the emergency room, even on the 27th iteration.  Because if they
didn't, the ambulance company could be sued for lots and lots of
money.  Likewise, emergency rooms are legally obligated to treat
anyone, regardless of ability to pay.  (And the hospital absorbs
the costs, which are enormous, so hospitals are closing their
emergency rooms...  It makes you wonder what's the point of having
economists if we're just going to ignore them.)  So I didn't quite
understand how the described events could have happened.  *Anyone*
reporting sudden chest pains should have been hauled off by an
ambulance instantly.

And this is where I fell down as a rationalist.  I remembered
several occasions where my doctor would completely fail to panic at
the report of symptoms that seemed, to me, very alarming.  And the
Medical Establishment was always right.  Every single time.  I had
chest pains myself, at one point, and the doctor patiently
explained to me that I was describing chest muscle pain, not a
heart attack.  So I said into the IRC channel, "Well, if the
paramedics told your friend it was nothing, it must *really be*
nothing - they'd have hauled him off if there was the tiniest
chance of serious trouble."

Thus I managed to explain the story within my existing model,
though the fit still felt a little forced...



Later on, the fellow comes back into the IRC chatroom and says his
friend made the whole thing up.  Evidently this was not one of his
more reliable friends.

I should have realized, perhaps, that an unknown acquaintance of an
acquaintance in an IRC channel might be
[less reliable](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/08/truth-bias.html)
than a published journal article.  Alas, belief is easier than
disbelief;
[we believe instinctively, but disbelief requires a conscious effort](http://www.wjh.harvard.edu/~dtg/Gilbert%20et%20al%20(EVERYTHING%20YOU%20READ).pdf).

So instead, by dint of mighty straining, I forced my model of
reality to explain an anomaly that *never actually happened.*  And
I *knew* how embarrassing this was.  I *knew* that the usefulness
of a model is not what it can explain, but what it can't.  A
hypothesis that forbids nothing, permits everything, and thereby
fails to
[constrain anticipation](/lw/i3/making_beliefs_pay_rent_in_anticipated_experiences/).

Your strength as a rationalist is your ability to be more confused
by fiction than by reality.  If you are equally good at explaining
any outcome, you have zero knowledge.

We are all weak, from time to time; the sad part is that I *could*
have been stronger.  I had all the information I needed to arrive
at the correct answer, I even *noticed* the problem, and then I
ignored it.  My feeling of confusion was a Clue, and I threw my
Clue away.

I should have paid more attention to that sensation of
*still feels a little forced.* It's one of the most important
feelings a truthseeker can have, a part of your strength as a
rationalist.  It is a design flaw in human cognition that this
sensation manifests as a quiet strain in the back of your mind,
instead of a wailing alarm siren and a glowing neon sign reading
"EITHER YOUR MODEL IS FALSE OR THIS STORY IS WRONG."
