
# Class Project

"Do as well as Einstein?" Jeffreyssai said, incredulously.  "*Just*
as well as Einstein?  Albert Einstein was a great scientist of his
era, but that was his era, not this one!  Einstein did not
comprehend the Bayesian methods; he lived before the cognitive
biases were discovered; he had no scientific grasp of his own
thought processes.  Einstein spoke nonsense of an impersonal God -
which tells you how well he understood the rhythm of reason, to
discard it outside his own field! He was too caught up in the drama
of rejecting his era's quantum mechanics to actually *fix* it.  And
while I grant that Einstein reasoned cleanly in the matter of
General Relativity - barring that matter of the cosmological
constant - he took ten years to do it.  Too slow!"

"*Too slow?*" repeated Taji incredulously.

"Too slow!  If Einstein were in this classroom now, rather than
Earth of the negative first century, I would rap his knuckles! 
*You will not try to do as well as Einstein!  You will aspire to do BETTER than Einstein or you may as well not bother!*"

Jeffreyssai shook his head.  "Well, I've given you enough hints. 
It is time to test your skills.  Now, I know that the other
*beisutsukai* don't think much of my class projects..." 
Jeffreyssai paused significantly.

Brennan inwardly sighed.  He'd heard this line many times before,
in the Bardic Conspiracy, the Competitive Conspiracy: 
*The other teachers think my assignments are too easy, you should be grateful,*followed
by some ridiculously difficult task -* *



"They say," Jeffreyssai said, "that my projects are too hard;
insanely hard; that they pass from the realm of madness into the
realm of Sparta; that Laplace himself would catch on fire; they
accuse me of trying to tear apart my students' souls -"

*Oh, crap.*

"But there is a reason," Jeffreyssai said, "why many of my students
have achieved great things; and by that I do not mean high rank in
the Bayesian Conspiracy.  I expected much of them, and they came to
expect much of themselves.  So..."

Jeffreyssai took a moment to look over his increasingly disturbed
students, "Here is your assignment.  Of quantum mechanics, and
General Relativity, you have been told.  This is the limit of Eld
science, and hence, the limit of public knowledge.  The five of
you, working on your own, are to produce the correct theory of
quantum gravity.  Your time limit is one month."

"*What?*" said Brennan, Taji, Styrlyn, and Yin.  Hiriwa gave them a
puzzled look.

"Should you succeed," Jeffreyssai continued, "you will be promoted
to *beisutsukai* of the second *dan* and sixth level.  We will see
if you have learned speed.  Your clock starts - *now*."

And Jeffreyssai strode out of the room, slamming the door behind
him.

"This is crazy!" Taji cried.

Hiriwa looked at Taji, bemused.  "The solution is not known to us. 
How can you know it is so difficult?"

"Because we *knew*about this problem back in the Eld days!  Eld
scientists worked on this problem for a lot longer than one
month."

Hiriwa shrugged.  "They were still arguing about many-worlds too,
weren't they?"

"*Enough!  There's no time!*"

The other four students looked to Styrlyn, remembering that he was
said to rank high in the Cooperative Conspiracy.  There was a brief
moment of weighing, of assessing, and then Styrlyn was their
leader.

Styrlyn took a great breath.  "We need a list of approaches.  Write
down all the angles you can think of.  Independently - we need your
individual components before we start combining.  In five minutes,
I'll ask each of you for your best idea first. 
*No wasted thoughts!  Go!*"

Brennan grabbed a sheet and his tracer, set the tip to the surface,
and then paused.  He couldn't think of anything clever to say about
unifying general relativity and quantum mechanics...

The other students were already writing.

Brennan tapped the tip, once, twice, thrice.  General relativity
and quantum mechanics...

Taji put his first sheet aside, grabbed another.

Finally, Brennan, for lack of anything clever to say, wrote down
the obvious.

Minutes later, when Styrlyn called time, it was still all he had
written.

"All right," Styrlyn said, "your best idea.  Or the idea you most
want the rest of us to take into account in our second components.
Taji, go!"

Taji looked over his sheets.  "Okay, I think we've got to assume
that every avenue that Eld science was trying is a blind alley, or
they would have found it.  And if this is possible to do in one
month, the answer must be, in some sense, elegant.  So no multiple
dimensions.  If we start doing anything that looks like we should
call it 'string theory', we'd better stop.  Maybe begin by
considering how failure to understand decoherence could have led
Eld science astray in quantizing gravity."

"The opposite of folly is folly," Hiriwa said.  "Let us pretend
that Eld science never existed."

"No criticisms yet!" said Styrlyn.  "Hiriwa, your suggestion?"

"Get rid of the infinities," said Hiriwa, "extirpate
[that which permits them](http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/jaynes90probability.html). 
It should not be a matter of cleverness with integrals. A
*representation*that allows infinity must be false-to-fact."

"Yin."

"We know from common sense," Yin said, "that if we stepped outside
the universe, we would see time laid out all at once, reality like
a crystal.  But I once encountered a hint that physics is timeless
in a deeper sense than that."  Yin's eyes were distant,
remembering. "Years ago, I found an abandoned city; it had been
uninhabited for eras, I think.  And behind a door whose locks were
broken, carved into one wall:  quote
*.ua sai .ei mi vimcu ty bu le mekso* unquote."

Brennan translated:  *Eureka!  Eliminate t from the equations.* 
And written in Lojban, the sacred language of science, which meant
the unknown writer had thought it to be true.* *

"The '[timeless physics](/lw/qp/timeless_physics/)' of which we've
all heard rumors," Yin said, "may be timeless in a very literal
sense."

"My own contribution," Styrlyn said.  "The quantum physics we've
learned is over joint positional configurations.  It seems like we
should be able to take that apart into a
[spatially local representation](/lw/q2/spooky_action_at_a_distance_the_nocommunication/),
in terms of invariant distant entanglements.  Finding that
representation might help us integrate with general relativity,
whose curvature is local."

"A strangely *individualist*perspective," Taji murmured, "for one
of the Cooperative Conspiracy."

Styrlyn shook his head.  "You misunderstand us, then.  The first
lesson we learn is that groups are made of people... no, there is
no time for politics.  Brennan!"

Brennan shrugged.  "Not much, I'm afraid, only the obvious.
Inertial mass-energy was always observed to equal gravitational
mass-energy, and Einstein showed that they were necessarily the
same. So why is the 'energy' that is an eigenvalue of the quantum
Hamiltonian, *necessarily*the same as the 'energy' quantity that
appears in the equations of General Relativity?  Why should
spacetime curve at the same rate that the little arrows rotate?"

There was a brief pause.

Yin frowned.  "That seems *too*obvious.  Wouldn't Eld science have
figured it out already?"

"Forget Eld science existed," Hiriwa said.  "The question stands:
we need the answer, whether it was known in ancient times or not. 
It cannot possibly be *coincidence.*"

Taji's eyes were abstracted.  "Perhaps it would be possible to show
that an exception to the equality would violate some conservation
law..."

"That is not where Brennan pointed," Hiriwa interrupted.  "He did
not ask for a proof that they must be set equal, given some
appealing principle; he asked for a view in which the two are one
and cannot be divided even conceptually, as was accomplished for
inertial mass-energy and gravitational mass-energy.  For we must
assume that the beauty of the whole arises from the fundamental
laws, and not the other way around.  Fair-rephrasing?"

"Fair-rephrasing," Brennan replied.

Silence reigned for thirty-seven seconds, as the five pondered the
five suggestions.

"I have an idea..."
