
# Einstein's Superpowers

There is a widespread tendency to talk (and think) as if Einstein,
Newton, and similar historical figures had superpowers - something
magical, something sacred, something beyond the mundane. 
(Remember, there are
[many more ways to worship a thing](/lw/j2/explainworshipignore/)
than lighting candles around its altar.)

Once I unthinkingly thought this way too, with respect to Einstein
in particular, until reading Julian Barbour's *The End of Time*
cured me of it.

Barbour laid out the history of anti-epiphenomenal physics and
Mach's Principle; he described the historical controversies that
predated Mach - all this that stood behind Einstein and was known
to Einstein, when Einstein tackled his problem...

And maybe I'm just imagining things - reading too much of
*myself*into Barbour's book - but I thought I heard Barbour very
quietly shouting, coded between the polite lines:

> What Einstein did *isn't magic,* people!  If you all just
> *looked at how he actually did it,* instead of falling to your
> knees and worshiping him, maybe then you'd be able to do it too!

Maybe I'm mistaken, or extrapolating too far... but I kinda suspect
that Barbour once tried to explain to people how you move further
along Einstein's direction to get timeless physics; and they
sniffed scornfully and said, "Oh, you think *you're* Einstein, do
you?"

John Baez's Crackpot Index, item 18:

> 10 points for each favorable comparison of yourself to Einstein, or
> claim that special or general relativity are fundamentally
> misguided (without good evidence).

Item 30:

> 30 points for suggesting that Einstein, in his later years, was
> groping his way towards the ideas you now advocate.

Barbour never bothers to compare himself to Einstein, of course;
nor does he ever appeal to Einstein in support of timeless
physics.  I mention these items on the Crackpot Index by way of
showing how many people compare themselves to Einstein, and what
society generally thinks of them.

The crackpot sees Einstein as something magical, so they compare
themselves to Einstein by way of praising themselves as magical;
they think Einstein had superpowers and they think they have
superpowers, hence the comparison.

But it is just the other side of the same coin, to think that
Einstein is sacred, and the crackpot is *not* sacred, therefore
they have committed blasphemy in comparing themselves to Einstein.

Suppose a bright young physicist says, "I admire Einstein's work,
but personally, I hope to do better."  If someone is shocked and
says, "What!  You haven't accomplished anything remotely like what
Einstein did; what makes you think you're smarter than him?" then
they are the other side of the crackpot's coin.

The underlying problem is conflating social status and research
potential.

Einstein has extremely high social status: because of his record of
accomplishments; because of *how* he did it; and because he's the
physicist whose name even the general public remembers, who brought
honor to science itself.

And we tend to
[mix up fame with other quantities](/lw/lk/superhero_bias/), and we
tend to attribute people's behavior to
[dispositions rather than situations](/lw/hz/correspondence_bias/).

So there's this tendency to think that Einstein, even before he was
famous, already had an inherent disposition to be Einstein - a
potential *as rare as his fame* and *as magical as his deeds.*  So
that if you claim to have the *potential*to do what Einstein did,
*it is just the same as claiming Einstein's rank,* rising far above
your assigned status in the tribe.

I'm not phrasing this well, but then, I'm trying to dissect a
confused thought:  Einstein belongs to a separate magisterium, the
sacred magisterium.  The sacred magisterium is distinct from the
mundane magisterium; you can't set out to be Einstein in the way
you can set out to be a full professor or a CEO.  Only beings with
divine potential can enter the sacred magisterium - and then it is
only fulfilling a destiny they already have.  So if you say you
want to outdo Einstein, you're claiming to *already be* part of the
sacred magisterium - you claim to have the same aura of destiny
that Einstein was born with, like a royal birthright...

"But Eliezer," you say, "surely not *everyone* can become
Einstein."

You mean to say, not everyone can *do better* than Einstein.

"Um... yeah, that's what I meant."

Well... in the modern world, you may be correct.  You probably
*should* remember that I am a transhumanist, going around looking
around at people thinking, "You know, it just sucks that not
everyone has the potential to do better than Einstein, and this
seems like a fixable problem."  It colors one's attitude.

But in the modern world, yes, not everyone has the potential to be
Einstein.

Still... how can I put this...

There's a phrase I once heard, can't remember where:  "Just another
Jewish genius."  Some poet or author or philosopher or other,
brilliant at a young age, doing something not tremendously
important in the grand scheme of things, not all that influential,
who ended up being dismissed as "Just another Jewish genius."

If Einstein had chosen the wrong angle of attack on his problem -
if he hadn't chosen a sufficiently important problem to work on -
if he hadn't persisted for years - if he'd taken any number of
wrong turns - or if someone else had solved the problem first -
then dear Albert would have ended up as just another Jewish
genius.

Geniuses are rare, but not all *that* rare.  It is not all that
implausible to lay claim to the kind of intellect that can get you
dismissed as "just another Jewish genius" or "just another
brilliant mind who never did anything interesting with their
life".  The associated social status here is not high enough to be
sacred, so it should seem like an ordinarily evaluable claim.

But what separates people like this from becoming Einstein, I
suspect, is no innate defect of brilliance.  It's things like "lack
of an interesting problem" - or, to put the blame where it belongs,
"failing to choose an important problem".  It is very easy to fail
at this because of the [cached thought](/lw/k5/cached_thoughts/)
problem:  Tell people to choose an important problem and they will
choose the first cache hit for "important problem" that pops into
their heads, like "global warming" or "string theory".

The truly important problems are often the ones you're not even
considering, because they appear to be impossible, or, um,
*actually difficult,* or worst of all, *not clear how to solve*. 
If you worked on them for years, they might not seem so
impossible... but this is an extra and unusual insight; naive
realism will tell you that solvable problems look solvable, and
impossible-looking problems are impossible.

Then you have to come up with a new and *worthwhile* angle of
attack.  Most people who are not allergic to novelty, will go too
far in the other direction, and fall into an
[affective death spiral](/lw/lm/affective_death_spirals/).

And then you've got to bang your head on the problem for years,
without being distracted by the temptations of easier living. 
"Life is what happens while we are making other plans," as the
saying goes, and if you want to fulfill your other plans, you've
often got to be ready to turn down life.

Society is not set up to support you while you work, either.

The point being, the problem is not that you need an aura of
destiny and the aura of destiny is missing.  If you'd met Albert
before he published his papers, you would have perceived no aura of
destiny about him to match his future high status.  He would seem
like just another Jewish genius.

This is not because the royal birthright is *concealed*, but
because it simply is *not there.*  It is *not necessary.*  There
*is no* separate magisterium for people who do important things.

I say this, because I want to do important things with my life, and
I have a genuinely important problem, and an angle of attack, and
I've been banging my head on it for years, and I've managed to set
up a support structure for it; and I very frequently meet people
who, in one way or another, say:  "Yeah?  Let's see your aura of
destiny, buddy."

What impressed me about Julian Barbour was a quality that I don't
think anyone would have known how to fake without actually *having*
it:  Barbour seemed to have *seen through* Einstein - he talked
about Einstein as if everything Einstein had done was perfectly
understandable and mundane.

Though even having realized this, to me it still came as a shock,
when Barbour said something along the lines of, "Now here's where
Einstein failed to apply his own methods, and missed the key
insight -"  But the shock was fleeting, I knew the Law: 
*No gods, no magic, and ancient heroes are milestones to tick off in your rearview mirror.*

This *seeing through* is something one has to *achieve,* an insight
one has to discover.  You cannot see through Einstein just by
saying, "Einstein is mundane!" if his work still seems like magic
unto you.  That would be like declaring "Consciousness must reduce
to neurons!" without having any idea of how to do it.  It's true,
but it doesn't solve the problem.

I'm not going to tell you that Einstein was an ordinary bloke
oversold by the media, or that deep down he was a regular schmuck
just like everyone else.  That would be going *much* too far.  To
walk this path, one must acquire abilities some consider to be...
unnatural.  I take a special joy in doing things that people call
"[humanly impossible](http://yudkowsky.net/essays/aibox.html)",
because it shows that I'm growing up.

Yet the way that you
[acquire magical powers](/lw/nb/something_to_protect/) is not by
being born with them, but by seeing, with a sudden shock, that they
*really are* perfectly normal.

This is a general principle in life.
