
# If Many-Worlds Had Come First

*Not that I'm claiming I could have done better, if I'd been born into*that*time, instead of this one...*

Macroscopic decoherence - the idea that the known quantum laws that
govern microscopic events, might simply govern at all levels
without alteration - also known as "many-worlds" - was first
proposed in a 1957 paper by Hugh Everett III.  The paper was
ignored.  John Wheeler told Everett to see Niels Bohr.  Bohr didn't
take him seriously.

Crushed, Everett left academic physics, invented the general use of
Lagrange multipliers in optimization problems, and became a
multimillionaire.

It wasn't until 1970, when Bryce DeWitt (who coined the term
"many-worlds") wrote an article for *Physics Today*, that the
general field was first informed of Everett's ideas.  Macroscopic
decoherence has been gaining advocates ever since, and may now be
the majority viewpoint (or not).

But suppose that decoherence and macroscopic decoherence had been
realized immediately following the discovery of entanglement, in
the 1920s.  And suppose that no one had proposed collapse theories
until 1957.  Would decoherence now be steadily declining in
popularity, while collapse theories were slowly gaining steam?

Imagine an alternate Earth, where the very first physicist to
discover entanglement and superposition, said, "Holy flaming
monkeys, there's a zillion other Earths out there!"

In the years since, many hypotheses have been proposed to explain
the mysterious
[Born probabilities](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/04/the-born-prob-1.html). 
But no one has *yet*suggested a collapse postulate.  That
possibility simply has not occurred to anyone.

One day, Huve Erett walks into the office of Biels Nohr...



"I just don't understand," Huve Erett said, "why no one in physics
even seems *interested* in my hypothesis.  Aren't the Born
statistics the greatest puzzle in modern quantum theory?"

Biels Nohr sighed.  Ordinarily, he wouldn't even bother, but
something about the young man compelled him to try.

"Huve," says Nohr, "every physicist meets dozens of people per year
who think they've explained the Born statistics.  If you go to a
party and tell someone you're a physicist, chances are at least one
in ten they've got a new explanation for the Born statistics.  It's
one of the most famous problems in modern science, and worse, it's
a problem that everyone thinks they can understand.  To get
attention, a new Born hypothesis has to be... pretty darn good."

"And *this,*" Huve says, "*this* isn't *good?*"

Huve gestures to the paper he'd brought to Biels Nohr.  It is a
short paper.  The title reads, "The Solution to the Born Problem". 
The body of the paper reads:

> "When you perform a measurement on a quantum system, all parts of
> the wavefunction except one point, vanish, with the survivor chosen
> non-deterministically in a way determined by the Born statistics."

"Let me make absolutely sure," Nohr says carefully, "that I
understand you.  You're saying that we've got this wavefunction -
evolving according to the Wheeler-DeWitt equation - and, all of a
sudden, the whole wavefunction, except for one part, just
spontaneously goes to zero amplitude.  Everywhere at once.  This
happens when, way up at the macroscopic level, we 'measure'
something."

"Right!" Huve says.

"So the wavefunction knows when we 'measure' it.  What exactly is a
'measurement'?  How does the wavefunction know we're here?  What
happened before humans were around to measure things?"

"Um..."  Huve thinks for a moment.  Then he reaches out for the
paper, scratches out "When you perform a measurement on a quantum
system", and writes in, "When a quantum superposition gets too
large."

Huve looks up brightly.  "Fixed!"

"I see," says Nohr.  "And how large is 'too large'?"

"At the 50-micron level, maybe," Huve says, "I hear they haven't
tested that yet."

Suddenly a student sticks his head into the room.  "Hey, did you
hear?  They just verified superposition at the 50-micron level."

"Oh," says Huve, "um, whichever level, then.  Whatever makes the
experimental results come out right."

Nohr grimaces.  "Look, young man, the truth here isn't going to be
comfortable.  Can you hear me out on this?"

"Yes," Huve says, "I just want to know why physicists won't listen
to me."

"All right," says Nohr.  He sighs.  "Look, if this theory of yours
were actually true - if whole sections of the wavefunction just
instantaneously vanished - it would be... let's see.  The only law
in all of quantum mechanics that is non-linear, non-unitary,
non-differentiable and discontinuous.  It would prevent physics
from evolving locally, with each piece only looking at its
immediate neighbors.  Your 'collapse' would be the only fundamental
phenomenon in all of physics with a preferred basis and a preferred
space of simultaneity.  Collapse would be the only phenomenon in
all of physics that violates CPT symmetry, Liouville's Theorem, and
Special Relativity.  In your original version, collapse would also
have been the only phenomenon in all of physics that was inherently
mental.  Have I left anything out?"

"Collapse is also the only acausal phenomenon," Huve points out. 
"Doesn't that make the theory more wonderful and amazing?"

"I think, Huve," says Nohr, "that physicists may view the
exceptionalism of your theory as a point not in its favor."

"Oh," said Huve, taken aback.  "Well, I think I can fix that
non-differentiability thing by postulating a second-order term in
the -"

"Huve," says Nohr, "I don't think you're getting my point, here. 
The reason physicists aren't paying attention to you, is that your
theory isn't physics.  It's magic."

"But the Born statistics are the greatest puzzle of modern physics,
and this theory provides a mechanism for the Born statistics!" Huve
protests.

"No, Huve, it doesn't," Nohr says wearily.  "That's like saying
that you've 'provided a mechanism' for electromagnetism by saying
that there are little angels pushing the charged particles around
in accordance with Maxwell's Equations.  Instead of saying, 'Here
are Maxwell's Equations, which tells the angels where to push the
electrons', we just say, 'Here are Maxwell's Equations' and are
left with a strictly simpler theory.  Now, we don't know *why* the
Born statistics happen.  But you haven't given the slightest reason
why your 'collapse postulate' should eliminate worlds in accordance
with the Born statistics, rather than something else.  You're not
even making use of the fact that quantum evolution is unitary -"

"That's because it's not," interjects Huve.

"- which everyone pretty much knows has got to be the key to the
Born statistics, somehow.  Instead you're merely saying, 'Here are
the Born statistics, which tell the collapser how to eliminate
worlds', and it's strictly simpler to just say 'Here are the Born
statistics'."

"But -" says Huve.

"*Also,*" says Nohr, raising his voice, "you've given no
justification for why there's only *one* surviving world left by
the collapse, or why the collapse happens before any *humans*get
superposed, which makes your theory *really suspicious* to a modern
physicist.  This is exactly the sort of untestable hypothesis that
the 'One Christ' crowd uses to argue that we should 'teach the
controversy' when we tell high school students about other
Earths."

"I'm not a One-Christer!" protests Huve.

"Fine," Nohr says, "then *why*do you just assume there's only one
world left?  And that's not the only problem with your theory. 
Which part of the wavefunction gets eliminated, exactly?  And in
which basis?  It's clear that the whole wavefunction isn't being
compressed down to a delta, or ordinary quantum computers couldn't
stay in superposition when any collapse occurred anywhere - heck,
ordinary molecular chemistry might start failing -"

Huve quickly crosses out 'one point' on his paper, writes in 'one
part', and then says, "Collapse doesn't compress the wavefunction
down to one point.  It eliminates all the amplitude *except* one
world, but leaves *all* the amplitude *in* that world."

"Why?" says Nohr.  "In principle, once you postulate 'collapse',
then 'collapse' could eliminate any part of the wavefunction,
anywhere - why just one neat world left?  Does the collapser
*know we're in here?*"

Huve says, "It leaves one whole world because that's what fits our
experiments."

"Huve," Nohr says patiently, "the term for that is 'post hoc'. 
Furthermore, decoherence is a continuous process.  If you partition
by whole brains with distinct neurons firing, the partitions have
almost zero mutual interference within the wavefunction.  But
plenty of other processes overlap a great deal.  There's no
possible way you can point to 'one world' and eliminate everything
else without making completely arbitrary choices, including an
arbitrary choice of basis -"

"But -" Huve says.

"And *above all,*" Nohr says, "the *reason* you can't tell me which
part of the wavefunction vanishes, or exactly when it happens, or
exactly what triggers it, is that if we did adopt this theory of
yours, it would be
*the only informally specified, qualitative fundamental law* taught
in all of physics.  Soon no two physicists anywhere would agree on
the exact details!  Why?  Because it would be the
*only fundamental law in all of modern physics that was believed without experimental evidence to nail down exactly how it worked.*"

"What, really?" says Huve.  "I thought a lot of physics was more
informal than that.  I mean, weren't you just talking about how
it's impossible to point to 'one world'?"

"That's because worlds aren't *fundamental,* Huve!  We have massive
experimental evidence underpinning the fundamental law, the
Wheeler-DeWitt equation, that we use to describe the evolution of
the wavefunction.  We just apply exactly the same equation to get
our description of macroscopic decoherence.  But for difficulties
of calculation, the equation would, in principle, tell us *exactly*
when macroscopic decoherence occurred.  We don't know where the
Born statistics come from, but we have massive evidence for what
the Born statistics *are*.  But when I ask you when, or where,
collapse occurs, you don't know -
*because there's no experimental evidence whatsoever to pin it down.* 
Huve, even if this 'collapse postulate' worked the way you say it
does,
*there's no possible way you could [know](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/02/perpetual-motio.html) it!* 
Why not a gazillion other equally magical possibilities?"

Huve raises his hands defensively.  "I'm not saying my theory
should be taught in the universities as accepted truth!  I just
want it experimentally tested! Is that so wrong?"

"You haven't specified when collapse happens, so I can't construct
a test that falsifies your theory," says Nohr.  "Now with that
said, we're already looking experimentally for any part of the
quantum laws that change at increasingly macroscopic levels.  Both
on general principles, in case there's something in the 20th
decimal point that only shows up in macroscopic systems, and also
in the hopes we'll discover something that sheds light on the Born
statistics.  We check decoherence times as a matter of course.  But
we keep a *broad* outlook on what might be different.  Nobody's
going to privilege your non-linear, non-unitary,
non-differentiable, non-local, non-CPT-symmetric, non-relativistic,
a-frikkin-causal, faster-than-light, *in-bloody-formal* 'collapse'
when it comes to looking for clues.  Not until they see absolutely
unmistakable evidence and believe me, Huve, it's going to take a
hell of a lot of evidence to unmistake *this*.  Even if we did find
anomalous decoherence times, and I don't think we will, it wouldn't
force your 'collapse' as the explanation."

"What?" says Huve.  "Why not?"

"Because there's got to be a billion more explanations that are
more plausible than violating Special Relativity," says Nohr.  "Do
you realize that if this really happened, there would only be a
*single* outcome when you measured a photon's polarization? 
Measuring one photon in an entangled pair would influence the other
photon a light-year away.  Einstein would have a heart attack."

"It doesn't *really* violate Special Relativity," says Huve.  "The
collapse occurs in exactly the right way to prevent you from ever
actually *detecting* the faster-than-light influence."

"That's not a point in your theory's favor," says Nohr.  "Also
Einstein would still have a heart attack."

"Oh," says Huve.  "Well, we'll say that the relevant aspects of the
particle *don't exist* until the collapse occurs.  If something
doesn't exist, influencing it doesn't violate Special Relativity
-"

"You're just digging yourself deeper.  Look, Huve, as a general
principle, theories that are actually *correct* don't generate this
level of confusion.  But above all, there isn't any evidence for
it.  You have no logical way of knowing that collapse occurs, and
no reason to believe it.  You made a mistake. 
[Just say 'oops'](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/08/the-importance-.html)
and
[get on with your life](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/09/the-crackpot-of.html)."

"But they *could* find the evidence someday," says Huve.

"I can't think of what evidence could determine *this particular*
one-world hypothesis as an explanation, but in any case, right now
we *haven't* found any such evidence," says Nohr.  "We haven't
found anything even vaguely suggestive of it!  You can't update on
evidence that could theoretically arrive someday but hasn't
arrived!  Right now, today, there's no reason to spend valuable
time thinking about this rather than a billion other equally
magical theories.  There's absolutely nothing that justifies your
belief in 'collapse theory' any *more*than believing that someday
we'll learn to transmit faster-than-light messages by tapping into
the acausal effects of praying to the Flying Spaghetti Monster!"

Huve draws himself up with wounded dignity.  "You know, if my
theory is wrong - and I do admit it might be wrong -"

"*If?"* says Nohr.  "*Might?"*

"If, I say, my theory is wrong," Huve continues, "then somewhere
out there is another world where *I* am the famous physicist and
*you* are the lone outcast!"

Nohr buries his head in his hands.  "Oh, not this again.  Haven't
you heard the saying, 'Live in your own world'?  And *you* of all
people -"

"Somewhere out there is a world where the vast majority of
physicists believe in collapse theory, and no one has even
*suggested* macroscopic decoherence over the last thirty years!"

Nohr raises his head, and begins to laugh.

"What's so funny?" Huve says suspiciously.

Nohr just laughs harder.  "Oh, my!  Oh, my!  You really think,
Huve, that there's a world out there where they've known about
quantum physics for thirty years, and nobody has even *thought*
there might be more than one world?"

"Yes," Huve says, "that's exactly what I think."

"Oh my!  So you're saying, Huve, that physicists detect
superposition in microscopic systems, and work out quantitative
equations that govern superposition in every single instance they
can test.  And for thirty years, not *one person* says, 'Hey, I
wonder if these laws happen to be universal'."

"Why should they?" says Huve.  "Physical models sometimes turn out
to be wrong when you examine new regimes."

"But to not even *think* of it?" Nohr says incredulously.  "You see
apples falling, work out the law of gravity for all the planets in
the solar system except Jupiter, and it doesn't even *occur* to you
to apply it to Jupiter because Jupiter is too large?  That's like,
like some kind of comedy routine where the guy opens a box, and it
contains a spring-loaded pie, so the guy opens another box, and it
contains another spring-loaded pie, and the guy just keeps doing
this without even *thinking* of the possibility that the next box
contains a pie too.  You think John von Neumann, who may have been
the highest-*g* human in history, wouldn't think of it?"

"That's right," Huve says, "He wouldn't.  Ponder that."

"This is the world where my good friend Ernest formulates his
Schrödinger's Cat thought experiment, and in this world, the
thought experiment goes:  'Hey, suppose we have a radioactive
particle that enters a superposition of decaying and not decaying. 
Then the particle interacts with a sensor, and the sensor goes into
a superposition of going off and not going off.  The sensor
interacts with an explosive, that goes into a superposition of
exploding and not exploding; which interacts with the cat, so the
cat goes into a superposition of being alive and dead.  Then a
human looks at the cat,' and at this point Schrödinger stops, and
goes, 'gee, I just can't imagine what could happen next.'  So
Schrödinger shows this to everyone else, and they're also like
'Wow, I got no idea what could happen at this point, what an
amazing paradox'.  Until finally *you* hear about it, and you're
like, 'hey, maybe at *that* point half of the superposition just
vanishes, at random, faster than light', and everyone else is like,
'Wow, what a great idea!'"

"That's right," Huve says again.  "It's got to have happened
somewhere."

"Huve, this is a world where every single physicist, and probably
the whole damn human species, is too dumb to sign up for cryonics! 
We're talking about the Earth where George W. Bush is President."
