
# Living in Many Worlds

Some commenters have recently expressed disturbance at the thought
of constantly splitting into zillions of other people, as is the
[straightforward and unavoidable prediction of quantum mechanics](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/05/many-worlds-one.html).

Others have confessed themselves unclear as to the implications of
many-worlds for planning:  If you decide to buckle your seat belt
in this world, does that increase the chance of another self
unbuckling their seat belt?  Are you being selfish at their
expense?

Just remember Egan's Law:  *It all adds up to normality.*

(After Greg Egan, in *Quarantine*.)



[Frank Sulloway](http://www.robertboynton.com/?art_id=119) said: 
"Ironically, psychoanalysis has it over Darwinism precisely because
its predictions are so outlandish and its explanations are so
counterintuitive that we think, *Is that really true? How radical!*
Freud’s ideas are so intriguing that people are willing to pay for
them, while one of the great disadvantages of Darwinism is that we
feel we know it already, because, in a sense, we do."

When Einstein overthrew the Newtonian version of gravity, apples
didn't stop falling, planets didn't swerve into the Sun.  Every new
theory of physics must *capture* the successful predictions of the
old theory it displaced; it should predict that the sky will be
blue, rather than green.

So don't think that many-worlds is there to make strange, radical,
exciting predictions.  It all adds up to normality.

Then why should anyone care?

Because there was once asked the question,
[fascinating](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/03/joy-in-the-real.html)
unto a rationalist:  *What* all adds up to normality?

And the answer to this question turns out to be: quantum
mechanics.  It is *quantum mechanics* that adds up to normality.

If there were something else there *instead* of quantum mechanics,
*then* the world would look strange and unusual.

Bear this in mind, when you are wondering how to live in the
strange new universe of many worlds: 
*You have always been there.*

Religions, anthropologists tell us, usually exhibit a property
called *minimal counterintuitiveness;* they are startling enough to
be memorable, but not so bizarre as to be *difficult* to memorize. 
Anubis has the head of a dog, which makes him memorable, but the
rest of him is the body of a man.  Spirits can see through walls;
[but they still become hungry](http://www.smbc-comics.com/index.php?db=comics&id=1038).

But physics is not a religion, set to surprise you just exactly
enough to be memorable.  The underlying phenomena are so
counterintuitive that it takes long study for humans to come to
grips with them.  But the surface phenomena are entirely ordinary. 
You will *never* catch a glimpse of another world out of the corner
of your eye.  You will *never* hear the voice of some other self. 
That is unambiguously prohibited outright by the laws.  Sorry,
you're just schizophrenic.

The act of making *decisions* has no special interaction with the
process that branches worlds.  In your *mind,* in your
*imagination,* a decision seems like a branching point where the
world could go two different ways.  But you would feel just the
same uncertainty, visualize just the same alternatives, if there
were only one world.  That's what people thought for centuries
before quantum mechanics, and they still visualized alternative
outcomes that could result from their decisions.

*Decision*and *decoherence* are *entirely orthogonal concepts.*  If
your brain never became decoherent, then that single cognitive
process would still have to imagine different choices and their
different outcomes.  And a rock, which makes no decisions, obeys
the same laws of quantum mechanics as anything else, and splits
frantically as it lies in one place.

You don't split *when you come to a decision* in *particular,* any
more than you particularly split when you take a breath.  You're
just splitting all the time as the result of decoherence, which has
nothing to do with choices.

There is a population of worlds, and in each world, it all adds up
to normality: apples don't stop falling.  In each world, people
choose the course that seems best to them.  Maybe they happen on a
different line of thinking, and see new implications or miss
others, and come to a different choice.  But it's not that one
world chooses each choice.  It's not that one version of you
chooses what seems best, and another version chooses what seems
worst.  In each world, apples go on falling and people go on doing
what seems like a good idea.

Yes, you can nitpick exceptions to this rule, but they're *normal*
exceptions.  It all adds up to normality, in all the worlds.

You cannot "choose which world to end up in".  In all the worlds,
people's choices determine outcomes in the same way they would in
just one single world.

The choice you make here does not have some strange balancing
influence on some world elsewhere.  There is no causal
communication between decoherent worlds.  In each world, people's
choices control the future of that world, not some other world.

If you can imagine decisionmaking in one world, you can imagine
decision-making in many worlds: just have the world constantly
splitting while otherwise obeying all the same rules.

In no world does two plus two equal five.  In no world can
spaceships travel faster than light.  All the quantum worlds obey
our laws of physics; their existence is asserted in the first place
by our laws of physics.  Since the beginning, not one unusual thing
has ever happened, in this or any other world.  They are all
lawful.

Are there horrible worlds out there, which are utterly beyond your
ability to affect?  Sure.  And horrible things happened during the
12th century, which are also beyond your ability to affect.  But
the 12th century is not your responsibility, because it has, as the
quaint phrase goes, "already happened".  I would suggest that you
consider every world which is not in your future, to be part of the
"generalized past".

Live in your own world.  Before you knew about quantum physics, you
would not have been tempted to try living in a world that did not
seem to exist.  Your decisions should add up to this same
normality: you shouldn't try to live in a quantum world you can't
communicate with.

Your decision theory should (almost always) be the same, whether
you suppose that there is a 90% probability of something happening,
or if it will happen in 9 out of 10 worlds.  Now, because people
have trouble handling probabilities, it may be helpful to visualize
something happening in 9 out of 10 worlds.  But this just helps you
use normal decision theory.

If you've been putting it off before, now is the time to learn to
[shut up and multiply](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/01/the-intuitions.html). 
As I noted in
[Lotteries: A Waste of Hope](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/04/lotteries_a_was.html):

> The human brain doesn't do 64-bit floating-point arithmetic, and it
> can't devalue the emotional force of a pleasant anticipation by a
> factor of 0.00000001 without dropping the line of reasoning
> entirely.

And in
[New Improved Lottery](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/04/new_improved_lo.html):

> Between zero chance of becoming wealthy, and epsilon chance, there
> is an order-of-epsilon difference.  If you doubt this, let epsilon
> equal one over googolplex.

If you're thinking about a world that could arise in a lawful way,
but whose probability is a quadrillion to one, and something very
pleasant or very awful is happening in this world... well, it does
probably exist, if it is lawful.  But you should try to release one
quadrillionth as many neurotransmitters, in your reward centers or
your aversive centers, so that you can weigh that world
*appropriately* in your decisions.  If you don't think you can do
that... don't bother thinking about it.

Otherwise you might as well go out and buy a lottery ticket using a
quantum random number, a strategy that is *guaranteed* to result in
a very tiny mega-win.

Or here's another way of thinking about it:  Are you considering
expending some mental energy on a world whose frequency in your
future is less than a trillionth?  Then go get a 10-sided die from
your local gaming store, and, before you begin thinking about that
strange world, start rolling the die.  If the die comes up 9 twelve
times in a row, *then*you can think about that world.  Otherwise
don't waste your time; thought-time is a resource to be expended
wisely.

You can roll the dice as many times as you like, but you can't
think about the world until 9 comes up twelve times in a row.  Then
you can think about it for a minute.  After that you have to start
rolling the die again.

This may help you to appreciate the concept of "trillion to one" on
a more visceral level.

If at any point you catch yourself thinking that quantum physics
might have some kind of strange, *abnormal* implication for
everyday life - then you should probably stop right there.

Oh, there are a *few* implications of many-worlds for ethics.
Average utilitarianism suddenly looks a lot more attractive - you
don't need to worry about creating as many people as possible,
because there are already plenty of people exploring person-space. 
You just want the average quality of life to be as high as
possible, in the future worlds that are your responsibility.

And you should always take
[joy in discovery](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/03/joy-in-discover.html),
as long as *you personally* don't know a thing.  It is meaningless
to talk of being the "first" or the "only" person to know a thing,
when everything knowable is known within worlds that are in neither
your past nor your future, and are neither before or after you.

But, by and large, it all adds up to normality.  If your
understanding of many-worlds is the tiniest bit *shaky*, and you
are contemplating whether to believe some strange proposition, or
feel some strange emotion, or plan some strange strategy, then I
can give you very simple advice:  Don't.

The quantum universe is not a strange place into which you have
been thrust.  It is the way things have always been.
