
# Mach's Principle: Anti-Epiphenomenal Physics

> **Warning:  Mach's Principle is not experimentally proven, though it is widely considered to be credible.**

Centuries ago, when Galileo was promoting the Copernican model in
which the Earth spun on its axis and traveled around the Sun, there
was great opposition from those who trusted their common sense:

"How could the Earth be moving?  I don't *feel*it moving!  The
ground beneath my feet seems perfectly steady!"

And lo, Galileo said:  If you were on a
[ship](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galileo's_ship) sailing across
a perfectly level sea, and you were in a room in the interior of
the ship, you wouldn't know how fast the ship was moving.  If you
threw a ball in the air, you would still be able to catch it,
because the ball would have initially been moving at the same speed
as you and the room and the ship. 
*So you can never tell how fast you are moving.*

This would turn out to be the beginning of one of the most
important ideas in the history of physics.  Maybe even *the* most
important idea in *all* of physics.  And I'm not talking about
Special Relativity.

Suppose the *entire*universe was moving.  Say, the universe was
moving left along the *x* axis at 10 kilometers per hour.

If you tried to visualize what I just said, it *seems*like you can
imagine it.  If the universe is standing still, then you imagine a
little swirly cloud of galaxies standing still.  If the whole
universe is moving left, then you imagine the little swirly cloud
moving left across your field of vision until it passes out of
sight.

But then, some people think they can imagine
[philosophical zombies](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/04/zombies.html):
entities who are identical to humans down to the molecular level,
but not conscious.  So you can't always trust your imagination.

Forget, for a moment, anything you know about relativity.  Pretend
you live in a Newtonian universe.

In a Newtonian universe, 3+1 spacetime can be broken down into 3
space dimensions and 1 time dimension, and you can write them out
as 4 real numbers, (x, y, z, t).  Deciding how to write the numbers
involves seemingly arbitrary choices, like which direction to call
'x', and which perpendicular direction to then call 'y', and where
in space and time to put your origin (0, 0, 0, 0), and whether to
use meters or miles to measure distance.  But once you make these
arbitrary choices, you can, in a Newtonian universe, use the same
system of coordinates to describe the whole universe.

Suppose that you pick an arbitrary but uniform (x, y, z, t)
coordinate system.  Suppose that you use these coordinates to
describe every physical experiment you've ever done - heck, every
observation you've ever made.

Next, suppose that you were, *in your coordinate system,* to shift
the origin 10 meters to the left along the x axis.  Then if you
originally thought that Grandma's House was 400 meters to the right
of the origin, you would now think that Grandma's House is 410
meters to the right of the origin.  Thus every point (x, y, z, t)
would be relabeled as (x' = x + 10, y' = y, z' = z, t' = t).

You can express the idea that "physics does not have an absolute
origin", by saying that the observed laws of physics, as you
generalize them, should be exactly the same after you perform this
coordinate transform.  The *history* may not be written out in
exactly the same way, but the *laws* will be written out the same
way.  Let's say that in the old coordinate system, Your House is at
(100, 10, -20, 7:00am) and you walk to Grandma's House at (400, 10,
-20, 7:05am).  Then you traveled from Your House to Grandma's House
at one meter per second.  In the new coordinate system, we would
write the history as (110, 10, 20, 7:00am) and (410, 10, -20,
7:05am) but your apparent speed would come out the same, and hence
so would your acceleration.  The *laws*governing how fast things
moved when you pushed on them - how fast you accelerated forward
when your legs pushed on the ground - would be the same.

Now if you were given to jumping to conclusions, and moreover,
given to jumping to conclusions that were exactly right, you might
say:

"Since there's no way of figuring out where the origin is by
looking at the laws of physics, the origin must not really
*exist!*  There *is* no (0, 0, 0, 0) point floating out in space
somewhere!"

Which is to say:  There is just *no fact of the matter* as to where
the origin "really" is.  When we argue about our choice of
representation, this fact about the map does not actually
[correspond](http://yudkowsky.net/bayes/truth.html) to any fact
about the territory.

Now this statement, if you interpret it in the natural way, is not
*necessarily* true.  We can readily imagine alternative laws of
physics, which, written out in their most natural form, would *not*
be insensitive to shifting the "origin".  The Aristotelian universe
had a crystal sphere of stars rotating around the Earth.  But so
far as anyone has been able to tell, in our real universe, the laws
of physics do *not* have any natural "origin" written into them. 
When you write out your observations in the simplest way, the
coordinate transform x' = x + 10 does not change any of the laws;
you write the same laws over x' as over x.

As Feynman said:

> Philosophers, incidentally, say a great deal about what is
> *absolutely necessary* for science, and it is always, so far as one
> can see, rather naive, and probably wrong.  For example, some
> philosopher or other said it is fundamental to the scientific
> effort that if an experiment is performed in, say, Stockholm, and
> then the same experiment is done in, say, Quito, the *same results*
> must occur.  That is quite false.  It is not necessary that
> *science* do that; it may be a *fact of experience,* but it is not
> necessary...
> 
> What *is* the fundamental hypothesis of science, the fundamental
> philosophy?  We stated it in the first chapter:
> *the sole test of the validity of any idea is experiment*...
> 
> If we are told that the same experiment will always produce the
> same result, that is all very well, but if when we try it, it does
> *not*, then it does *not*.  We just have to take what we see, and
> then formulate all the rest of our ideas in terms of our actual
> experience.

And so if you regard the universe itself as a sort of Galileo's
Ship, it would seem that the notion of the entire universe
*moving at a particular rate* - say, all the objects in the
universe, including yourself, moving left along the x axis at 10
meters per second - must also be silly.  *What* is it that moves?

If you believe that everything in a Newtonian universe is moving
left along the x axis at an average of 10 meters per second, then
that just says that when you write down your observations, you
write down an x coordinate that is 10 meters per second to the
left, of what you would have written down, if you believed the
universe was standing still.  If the universe is standing still,
you would write that Grandma's House was observed at (400, 10, -20,
7:00am) and then observed again, a minute later, at (400, 10, -20,
7:01am).  If you believe that the whole universe is moving to the
left at 10 meters per second, you would write that Grandma's House
was observed at (400, 10, -20, 7:00am) and then observed again at
(-200, 10, -20, 7:01am).  Which is just the same as believing that
the *origin* of the universe is moving *right* at 10 meters per
second.

But the universe has no origin!  So this notion of the
*whole universe* moving at a particular speed, must be nonsense.

Yet if it makes no sense to talk about speed in an absolute, global
sense, then what *is*speed?

It is simply the movement of *one* thing *relative* to a
*different* thing!  *This* is what our laws of physics talk
about... right?  The law of gravity, for example, talks about how
planets pull on each *other,* and change their velocity relative to
each *other.*  Our physics do not talk about a crystal sphere of
stars spinning around the objective center of the universe.

And now - it seems - we understand how we have been misled, by
trying to *visualize* "the whole universe moving left", and
*imagining* a little blurry blob of galaxies scurrying from the
right to the left of our visual field.  When we imagine this sort
of thing, it is (probably) articulated in our visual cortex; when
we visualize a little blob scurrying to the left, then there is
(probably) an activation pattern that proceeds across the columns
of our visual cortex.  The seeming absolute *background*, the
*origin* relative to which the universe was *moving,* was in the
underlying neurology we used to visualize it!

But there is no origin!  So the whole thing was just a case of the
[Mind Projection Fallacy](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/03/mind-projection.html)
- *again.*

Ah, but now Newton comes along, and he sees the flaw in the whole
argument.

From Galileo's Ship we pass to Newton's Bucket.  This is a bucket
of water, hung by a cord.  If you twist up the cord tightly, and
then release the bucket, the bucket will spin.  The water in the
bucket, as the bucket wall begins to accelerate it, will assume a
concave shape.  Water will climb up the walls of the bucket, from
centripetal force.

If you supposed that the whole universe was *rotating* relative to
the origin, the parts would experience a centrifugal force, and fly
apart.  (No this is not why the universe is expanding, thank you
for asking.)

Newton used his
[Bucket](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bucket_argument) to argue in
favor of an absolute space - an absolute background for his
physics.  There was a testable difference between the whole
universe rotating, and the whole universe *not* rotating.  By
looking at the parts of the universe, you could determine their
rotational velocity - not relative to *each other*, but relative to
*absolute space*.

This absolute space was a tangible thing, to Newton: it was aether,
possibly involved in the transmission of gravity.  Newton didn't
believe in action-at-a-distance, and so he used his Bucket to argue
for the existence of an absolute space, that would be an aether,
that could perhaps transmit gravity.

Then the origin-free view of the universe took another hit. 
Maxwell's Equations showed that, indeed, there seemed to be an
absolute speed of light - a standard rate at which the electric and
magnetic fields would oscillate and transmit a wave.  In which
case, you could determine how fast you were going, by seeing in
which directions light seemed to be moving quicker and slower.

Along came a stubborn fellow named Ernst Mach, who *really* didn't
like absolute space.  Following some earlier ideas of Leibniz, Mach
tried to get rid of Newton's Bucket by asserting that *inertia* was
about your *relative* motion.  Mach's Principle asserted that the
resistance-to-changing-speed that determined how fast you
accelerated under a force, was a resistance to changing your
*relative* speed, compared to other objects.  So that if the whole
universe was rotating, no one would notice anything, because the
inertial frame would also be rotating.

Or to put Mach's Principle more precisely, even if you
*imagined*the whole universe was rotating, the *relative* motions
of all the objects in the universe would be just the same as
before, and their *inertia* - their *resistance* to changes of
*relative* motion - would be just the same as before.

At the time, there did not seem to be any good reason to suppose
this.  It seemed like a mere attempt to impose philosophical
elegance on a universe that had no particular reason to comply.

The story continues. A couple of guys named Michelson and Morley
built an ingenious apparatus that would, via interference patterns
in light, detect the absolute motion of Earth - as it spun on its
axis, and orbited the Sun, which orbited the Milky Way, which
hurtled toward Andromeda.  Or, if you preferred, the
Michelson-Morley apparatus would detect Earth's motion relative to
the luminiferous aether, the medium through which light waves
propagated.  Just like Maxwell's Equations seemed to say you could
do, and just like Newton had always thought you could do.

The Michelson-Morley apparatus said the absolute motion was zero.

This caused a certain amount of consternation.

Enter Albert Einstein.

The first thing Einstein did was repair the problem posed by
Maxwell's Equations, which seemed to talk about an absolute speed
of light.  If you used a different, non-Galilean set of coordinate
transforms - the Lorentz transformations - you could show that the
speed of light would always look the same, in every direction, no
matter how fast you were moving.

I'm not going to talk much about Special Relativity, because that
introduction has already been written many times.  If you don't get
all
[indignant](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2007/05/think_like_real.html)
about "space" and "time" not turning out to work the way you
thought they did, the math should be straightforward.

Albeit for the benefit of those who may need to resist
postmodernism, I will note that the word "relativity" is a
misnomer.  What "relativity" really does, is establish
*new invariant elements of reality**.*  The quantity √(t^2^ - x^2^
- y^2^ - z^2^) is the same in every frame of reference.  The x and
y and z, and even t, seem to change with your point of view.  But
not √(t^2^ - x^2^ - y^2^ - z^2^).  Relativity does not make reality
inherently subjective; it just makes it objective in a different
way.

Special Relativity was a relatively easy job.  Had Einstein never
been born, Lorentz, Poincaré, and Minkowski would have taken care
of it.  Einstein got the Nobel Prize for his work on the
photoelectric effect, not for Special Relativity.

*General*Relativity was the impressive part. 

Einstein - explicitly inspired by Mach - and even though there was
no experimental evidence for Mach's Principle - reformulated
gravitational accelerations as a curvature of spacetime.

If you try to draw a straight line on curved paper, the curvature
of the paper may twist your line, so that even as you proceed in a
locally straight direction, it seems (standing back from an
imaginary global viewpoint) that you have moved in a curve.  Like
walking "forward" for thousands of miles, and finding that you have
circled the Earth.

In curved spacetime, objects under the "influence" of gravity,
always seem to themselves - locally - to be proceeding along a
strictly inertial pathway.

This meant you could *never*tell the difference between firing your
rocket to accelerate through flat spacetime, and firing your rocket
to stay in the same place in curved spacetime.  You could
accelerate the imaginary 'origin' of the universe, while changing a
corresponding degree of freedom in the curvature of spacetime, and
keep exactly the same laws of physics.

Einstein's theory further had the property that moving matter would
generate *gravitational waves,* propagating curvatures.  Einstein
suspected that if the whole universe was rotating around you while
you stood still, you would feel a *centrifugal force* from the
incoming gravitational waves, corresponding exactly to the
*centripetal force* of spinning your arms while the universe stood
still around you.  So you could construct the laws of physics in an
accelerating or even rotating frame of reference, and end up
observing the same laws - again freeing us of the specter of
absolute space.

(I do not think this has been verified exactly, in terms of how
much matter is out there, what kind of gravitational wave it would
generate by rotating around us, et cetera.  Einstein did verify
that a shell of matter, spinning around a central point, ought to
generate a gravitational equivalent of the Coriolis force that
would e.g. cause a pendulum to precess.  Remember that, by the
basic principle of gravity as curved spacetime, this is
*indistinguishable in principle* from a rotating inertial reference
frame.)

We come now to the most important idea in all of physics.  (Not
counting the concept of "describe the universe using math", which I
consider as the idea *of* physics, not an idea *in* physics.)

The idea is that you can start from "It shouldn't ought to be
possible for X and Y to have different values from each other", or
"It shouldn't ought to be possible to distinguish different values
of Z", and generate *new physics* that make this
*fundamentally*impossible because X and Y are now *the same thing*,
or because Z *no longer exists*.  And the new physics will often be
*experimentally verifiable.*

We can interpret many of the most important revolutions in physics
in these terms:

-   Galileo / "The Earth is not the center of the universe":  You
    shouldn't ought to be able to tell "where" the universe is -
    shifting all the objects a few feet to the left should have no
    effect.
-   Special Relativity:  You shouldn't ought to be able to tell how
    fast you, or the universe, are moving.
-   General Relativity:  You shouldn't ought to be able to tell how
    fast you, or the universe, are accelerating.
-   Quantum mechanics:  You shouldn't ought to be able to tell two
    [identical particles](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/04/no-individual-p.html)
    apart.

Whenever you find that two things seem to always be exactly equal -
like inertial mass and gravitational charge, or two electrons - it
is a hint that the underlying physics are such as to make this a
*necessary identity*, rather than a *contingent equality.*  It is a
hint that, when you see through to the underlying elements of
reality, inertial mass and gravitational charge will be the
*same thing*, not merely *equal.*  That you will no longer be able
to *imagine* them being different, if your imagination is over the
elements of reality in the new theory.

Likewise with the way that quantum physics treats the similarity of
two particles of the same species.  It is not that "photon A at 1,
and photon B at 2" happens to *look just like* "photon A at 2, and
photon B at 1" but that they are *the same element of reality.*

When you see a seemingly contingent equality - two things that just
happen to be equal, all the time, every time - it may be time to
reformulate your physics so that there is one thing instead of
two.  The *distinction you imagine*is epiphenomenal; it has no
experimental consequences.  In the right physics, with the right
elements of reality, you would no longer be able to *imagine*it.

The amazing thing is that this is a scientifically productive rule
- finding a new representation that gets rid of epiphenomenal
distinctions, often means a substantially different theory of
physics with experimental consequences!

(Sure, what I just said is logically impossible, but it works.)
