
# The Concious Sorites Paradox  

Decoherence is implicit in quantum physics, not an extra postulate
on top of it, and quantum physics is continuous.  Thus,
"decoherence" is not an all-or-nothing phenomenon - there's no
sharp cutoff point.  Given two blobs, there's a *quantitative*
amount of amplitude that can flow into identical configurations
between them.  This quantum interference diminishes down to an
exponentially tiny infinitesimal as the two blobs separate in
configuration space.

Asking *exactly when* decoherence takes place, in this continuous
process, is like asking when, if you keep removing grains of sand
from a pile, it stops being a "heap".

The sand-heap dilemma is known as the
[Sorites Paradox](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sorites_Paradox),
after the Greek *soros,* for heap.  It is attributed to Eubulides
of Miletus, in the 4th century BCE.  The moral I draw from this
very ancient tale:  If you try to draw sharp lines in a continuous
process and you end up looking silly, it's your own darn fault.

(Incidentally, I once posed the Sorites Paradox to Marcello
Herreshoff, who hadn't previously heard of it; and Marcello
answered without the slightest hesitation, "If you remove all the
sand, what's left is a 'heap of zero grains'."  Now *that's* a
computer scientist.)

Ah, but what about when *people* become decoherent?  What of the
Conscious Sorites Paradox?

What about the case where two blobs of amplitude containing people
are interacting, but *only somewhat*- so that there is visibly a
degree of causal influence, and visibly a degree of causal
independence?

Okay, this interval may work out to less than the
[Planck time](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Planck_time) for objects
the size of a human brain.  But I see that as no excuse to evade
the question.  In principle we could build a brain that would make
the interval longer.

Shouldn't there be some definite fact of the matter as to when one
person becomes two people?

Some folks out there would just say "No".  I suspect Daniel Dennett
would just say "No".  Personally, I *wish* I could just say "No",
but I'm
[not that advanced yet](/lw/pt/where_experience_confuses_physicists/). 
I haven't yet devised a way to express my appreciation of the
orderliness of the universe, which doesn't involve counting people
in orderly states as compared to disorderly states.

Yet if you insist on an objective population count,
*for whatever reason*, you have Soritic problems *whether or not*
you delve into quantum physics.

What about the [Ebborians](/lw/ps/where_physics_meets_experience/)?
The Ebborians, you recall, have brains like flat sheets of
conducting polymer, and when they reproduce, the brain-sheet splits
down its thickness.  In the beginning, there is definitely one
brain; in the end, there is definitely two brains; in between,
there is a continuous decrease of causal influence and
synchronization.  When does one Ebborian become two?

Those who insist on an objective population count in a decoherent
universe, must confront *exactly analogous* people-splitting
problems in classical physics!

Heck, you could *simulate* quantum physics the way
we*currently think* it works, and ask exactly the same question! 
At the beginning there is one blob, at the end there are two blobs,
in this universe we have constructed.  So when does the
consciousness split, if you think there's an objective answer to
that?

Demanding an objective population count is not a reason to object
to *decoherence,* as such.  Indeed, the last fellow I
[argued](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/04/where-experienc.html#comment-112369238)
with, ended up
[agreeing](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/04/where-experienc.html#comment-112371930)
that his objection to decoherence was in fact a fully general
objection to functionalist theories of consciousness.

You might be tempted to try sweeping the Conscious Sorites Paradox
under a rug, by postulating additionally that the Quantum Spaghetti
Monster eats certain blobs of amplitude at exactly the right time
to avoid a split.

But then (1) you have to explain exactly when the QSM eats the
amplitude, so you aren't avoiding any burden of specification.

And (2) you're requiring the Conscious Sorites Paradox to get
answered *by fundamental physics*, rather than being answered or
[dissolved](/lw/of/dissolving_the_question/) by a better
understanding of consciousness.  It's hard to see why taking this
stance advances your position, rather than just closing doors.

In fact (3) if you think you have a definite answer to "When are
there two people?", then it's hard to see why you can't just give
that *same* answer within the *standard* quantum theory instead. 
The Quantum Spaghetti Monster isn't really *helping*here!  For
every definite theory with a QSM, there's an equally definite
theory with no QSM.  This is one of those occasions you have to pay
close attention to see the superfluous element of your theory that
doesn't really explain anything - it's harder when the theory as a
whole does explain something, as quantum physics certainly does.

Above all, (4) you would *still have to explain afterward* what
happens with the Ebborians, or what happens to decoherent people in
a simulation of quantum physics the way we *currently think* it
works.  So you *really* aren't avoiding any questions!

It's also worth noting that, in any physics that is continuous (or
even any physics that has a very fine-grained discrete cellular
level underneath), there are further Conscious Sorites Parodoxes
for when people are born and when they die.  The bullet plows into
your brain, crushing one neuron after another - when exactly are
there zero people instead of one?

Does it still seem like the Conscious Sorites Paradox is an
objection to *decoherent quantum mechanics,* in particular?

A reductionist would say that the Conscious Sorites Paradox is not
a puzzle *for physicists*, because it is a puzzle you get even
after the physicists have done their duty, and told us the true
laws governing every fundamental event.

As
[previously touched on](/lw/pt/where_experience_confuses_physicists/),
this doesn't imply that consciousness is a matter of
[nonphysical knowledge](/lw/p7/zombies_zombies/).  You can know the
fundamental laws, and yet lack the computing power to do protein
folding.  So, too, you can know the fundamental laws; and yet lack
the empirical knowledge of the brain's configuration, or miss the
insight into higher levels of organization, which would give you a
compressed understanding of consciousness.

Or so a materialist would assume.  A non-epiphenomenal dualist
would say, "Ah, but you *don't* know the true laws of fundamental
physics, and when you *do* know them, *that* is where you will find
the thundering insight that also resolves questions of
consciousness and identity."

It's because I actually *do* acknowledge the possibility that there
is some thundering insight in the fundamental physics we don't know
yet, that I am not quite willing to say that the Conscious Sorites
puzzle is not a puzzle for physicists.  Or to look at it another
way, the problem might not be *their responsibility,* but that
doesn't mean they *can't help.*  The physicists might even swoop in
and solve it, you never know.

In one sense, there's a clear gap in our interpretation of
decoherence: we don't know *exactly* how quantum-mechanical states
correspond to the experiences that are (from a Cartesian
standpoint) our final experimental results.

But this is something you could say about *all* current scientific
theories
([at least that I've heard of](/lw/kj/no_one_knows_what_science_doesnt_know/)). 
And I, for one, am betting that the puzzle-cracking insight comes
from a cognitive scientist.

I'm not just saying *tu quoque* (i.e., "Your theory has that
problem too!")  I'm saying that "But you haven't explained
consciousness!" doesn't reasonably seem like the *responsibility*
of physicists, or an *objection*to a theory of *fundamental*
physics.* *

An analogy:  When a doctor says, "Hey, I think that virus X97 is
causing people to drip green slime," you don't respond:  "Aha, but
you haven't explained the *exact* chain of causality whereby this
merely physical virus leads to my *experience* of dripping green
slime... so it's probably not a virus that does it, but a
bacterium!"

This is another of those sleights-of-hand that you have to pay
close attention to notice.  Why does a non-viral theory do any
*better* than a viral theory at explaining which biological states
correspond to which conscious experiences?  There is a puzzle here,
but how is it a puzzle that provides *evidence* for one
*epidemiological* theory *over another*?

It can reasonably seem that,
*however consciousness turns out to work*, getting infected with
virus X97 *eventually* causes your experience of dripping green
slime.  You've solved the *medical* part of the problem, as it
were, and the remaining mystery is a matter for cognitive science.

Likewise, when a physicist has said that two objects attract each
other with a force that goes as the product of the masses and the
inverse square of the distance between them, that looks pretty much
consistent with the experience of an apple falling on your head. 
If you have an experience of the apple floating off into space,
*that's* a problem for the physicist.  But that you have
*any experience at all*, is not a problem for
*that particular theory of gravity*.

If two blobs of amplitude are no longer interacting, it seems
reasonable to regard this as consistent with there being two
different brains that have two different experiences,
*however consciousness turns out to work*.  Decoherence has a
pretty reasonable explanation of why you experience a single world
*rather than* an entangled one, given that you experience anything
at all.

However the whole debate over consciousness turns out, it seems
that we see pretty much what we should expect to see given
decoherent physics.  What's left is a puzzle, but it's not a
physicist's responsibility to answer.

...is what I would *like* to say.

But unfortunately there's that whole thing with the squared modulus
of the complex amplitude giving the apparent "probability" of
"finding ourselves in a particular blob".

That part is a serious puzzle with no obvious answer, which I've
[discussed already in analogy](/lw/ps/where_physics_meets_experience/). 
I'll shortly be doing an explanation of how the problem looks from
within actual quantum theory.

Just remember, if someone presents you with an apparent "answer" to
this puzzle, don't forget to check whether the phenomenon
[still seems mysterious](/lw/iu/mysterious_answers_to_mysterious_questions/),
whether the answer
[really explains anything](/lw/is/fake_causality/), and whether
[every part of the hypothesis](/lw/jk/burdensome_details/) is
actively helping.
