
# The Failures of Eld Science

This time there were no robes, no hoods, no masks.  Students were
expected to become friends, and allies.  And everyone knew why you
were in the classroom.  It would have been pointless to pretend you
weren't in the Conspiracy.

Their *sensei*was Jeffreyssai, who might have been the best of his
era, in his era.  His students were either the most promising
learners, or those whom the *beisutsukai* saw political advantage
in molding.

Brennan fell into the latter category, and knew it.  Nor had he
hesitated to use his Mistress's name to open doors.  You used every
avenue available to you, in seeking knowledge; that was respected
here.

"- for over thirty years," Jeffreyssai said.  "Not one of them saw
it; not Einstein, not Schrödinger, not even von Neumann."  He
turned away from his sketcher, and toward the classroom.  "I pose
to you to the question:  How did they fail?"

The students exchanged quick glances, a calculus of mutual risk
between the wary and the merely baffled.  Jeffreyssai was known to
play games.



Finally Hiriwa-called-the-Black leaned forward, jangling slightly
as her equation-carved bracelets shifted on her ankles.  "By your
years given, *sensei,* this was two hundred and fifty years after
Newton.  Surely, the scientists of that era must have grokked the
concept of a universal law."

"Knowing the universal law of gravity," said the student Taji, from
a nearby seat, "is not the same as understanding the concept *of* a
universal law." He was one of the promising ones, as was Hiriwa.

Hiriwa frowned.  "No... it was said that Newton had been praised
*for* discovering the first universal.  Even in his own era.  So it
was known."  Hiriwa paused.  "But Newton himself would have been
gone.  Was there a *religious* injunction against proposing further
universals?  Did they refrain out of respect for Newton, or were
they waiting for his *ghost* to speak?  I am not clear on how Eld
science was motivated -"

"No," murmured Taji, a laugh in his voice, "you really, *really*
aren't."

Jeffreyssai's expression was kindly.  "Hiriwa, it wasn't religion,
and it wasn't lead in the drinking water, and they didn't all have
Alzheimers, and they weren't sitting around all day reading
webcomics.  Forget the catalogue of horrors out of ancient times.
Just think in terms of cognitive errors.  What could Eld science
have been *thinking*wrong?"

Hiriwa sat back with a sigh. "*Sensei,* I truly cannot imagine a
snafu that would do *that*."

"It wouldn't be just *one* mistake," Taji corrected her.  "As the
saying goes:  Mistakes don't travel alone; they hunt in packs."

"But the *entire* human species?" said Hiriwa.  "Thirty *years*?"

"It wasn't the entire human species, Hiriwa," said Styrlyn. He was
one of the older-looking students, wearing a short beard speckled
in grey.  "Maybe one in a hundred thousand could have written out
Schrödinger's Equation from memory.  So that would have been their
first and primary error - failure to concentrate their forces."

"*Spare us the propaganda!*" Jeffreyssai's gaze was suddenly
fierce.  "You are not here to proselytize for the Cooperative
Conspiracy, my lord politician!  Bend not the truth to make your
points!  I believe your Conspiracy has a phrase:  'Comparative
advantage.'  Do you *really* think that it would have helped to
call in the whole human species, as it existed at that time, to
debate quantum physics?"

Styrlyn didn't flinch.  "Perhaps not, *sensei,*" he said.  "But if
you are to compare that era to this one, it is a consideration."

Jeffreyssai moved his hand flatly through the air; the
maybe-gesture he used to dismiss an argument that was true but not
relevant.  "It is not what I would call a *primary* mistake.  The
puzzle should not have required a billion physicists to solve."

"I can think of more *specific* ancient horrors," said Taji.
"Spending all day writing grant proposals.  Teaching undergraduates
who would rather be somewhere else.  Needing to publish thirty
papers a year to get tenure..."

"But we are not speaking of only the lower-status scientists," said
Yin; she wore a slightly teasing grin.  "It was said of Schrödinger
that he retired to a villa for a month, with his mistress to
provide inspiration, and emerged with his eponymous equation.  We
consider it a famous historical success of our methodology.  Some
Eld physicists *did* understand how to focus their mental energies;
and would have been senior enough to do so, had they chose."

"True," Taji said.  "In the end, administrative burdens are only a
generic obstacle.  Likewise such answers as, 'They were not trained
in probability theory, and did not know of cognitive biases.'  Our
sensei seems to desire some more specific reply."

Jeffreyssai lifted an eyebrow encouragingly.  "Don't dismiss your
line of thought so quickly, Taji; it begins to be relevant.  What
kind of system would create administrative burdens on its own
people?"

"A system that failed to support its people adequately," said
Styrlyn.  "One that failed to value their work."

"Ah," said Jeffreyssai.  "But there is a student who has not yet
spoken.  *Brennan?*"

Brennan didn't jump.  He deliberately waited just long enough to
show he wasn't scared, and then said, "Lack of pragmatic
motivation, sensei."

Jeffreyssai smiled slightly. "Expand."

*What kind of system would create administrative burdens on its own people?*,
their *sensei* had asked them.  The other students were pursuing
their own lines of thought. Brennan, hanging back, had more
attention to spare for his teacher's few hints.  Being the beginner
wasn't *always* a disadvantage - and he had been taught, long
before the Bayesians took him in, to take every available
advantage.

"The Manhattan Project," Brennan said, "was launched with a
specific *technological*end in sight: a weapon of great power, in
time of war.  But the error that Eld Science committed with respect
to quantum physics had no immediate consequences for their
technology. They were confused, but they had no desperate *need*for
an answer.  Otherwise the surrounding system would have removed all
burdens from their effort to solve it.  Surely the Manhattan
Project must have done so - Taji?  Do you know?"

Taji looked thoughtful.  "Not *all* burdens - but I'm pretty sure
they weren't writing grant proposals in the middle of their work."

"So," Jeffreyssai said.  He advanced a few steps, stood directly in
front of Brennan's desk.  "You think Eld scientists simply weren't
trying hard enough.  Because their art had no military
applications?  A rather *competitive* point of view, I should
think."

"Not necessarily," Brennan said calmly.  "Pragmatism is a virtue of
rationality also.  A desired *use* for a better quantum theory,
would have helped the Eld scientists in many ways beyond just
motivating them.  It would have given shape to their curiosity, and
told them what constituted success or failure."

Jeffreyssai chuckled slightly.  "Don't guess so hard what *I* might
prefer to hear, Competitor.  Your first statement came closer to my
hidden mark; your oh-so-Bayesian disclaimer fell wide...  The
factor I had in mind, Brennan, was that Eld scientists thought it
was *acceptable* to take thirty years to solve a problem.  Their
entire social process of science was based on getting to the truth
*eventually.* A wrong theory got discarded *eventually* - once the
next generation of students grew up familiar with the replacement. 
Work expands to fill the time allotted, as the saying goes.  But
people can think important thoughts in far less than thirty years,
if they *expect* speed of themselves."  Jeffreyssai suddenly
slammed down a hand on the arm of Brennan's chair. 
"*How long do you have to dodge a thrown knife?*"

"Very little time, sensei!"

"*Less than a second!  Two opponents are attacking you!  How long do you have to guess who's more dangerous?*"

"Less than a second, sensei!"

"*The two opponents have split up and are attacking two of your girlfriends!  How long do you have to decide which one you truly love?*"

"Less than a second, sensei!'

"*A new argument shows your precious theory is flawed!  How long does it take you to change your mind?*"

"Less than a second, sensei!"

"*WRONG! DON'T GIVE ME THE WRONG ANSWER JUST BECAUSE IT FITS A CONVENIENT PATTERN AND I SEEM TO EXPECT IT OF YOU! *How
long does it really take, Brennan?"

Sweat was forming on Brennan's back, but he stopped and actually
thought about it -

"*ANSWER, BRENNAN!"*

*"No sensei!  I'm not finished thinking sensei!  An answer would be premature!  Sensei!*"

"*Very good!  Continue!  But don't take thirty years!*"

Brennan breathed deeply, reforming his thoughts.  He finally said,
"Realistically, sensei, the best-case scenario is that I would see
the problem immediately; use the discipline of suspending judgment;
try to re-accumulate all the evidence before continuing; and
depending on how emotionally attached I had been to the theory, use
the crisis-of-belief technique to ensure I could genuinely go
either way.  So at least five minutes and perhaps up to an hour."

"*Good!  You actually thought about it that time!  Think about it every time!  Break patterns!* 
In the days of Eld Science, Brennan, it was not uncommon for a
grant agency to spend six months reviewing a proposal. 
*They permitted themselves the time! *You are being graded on your
*speed,*Brennan!  The question is not whether you get there
eventually!  Anyone can find the truth in five thousand years!  You
need to *move faster!*"

"*Yes, sensei!*"

"Now, Brennan, have you just learned something new?"

"Yes, sensei!"

"How long did it take you to learn this new thing?"

An arbitrary choice there...  "Less than a minute, sensei, from the
boundary that seems most obvious."

"Less than a minute," Jeffreyssai repeated.  "So, Brennan, how long
do you think it should take to solve a major scientific problem, if
you are not wasting any time?"

Now there was a trapped question if Brennan had ever heard one. 
There was no way to guess what time period Jeffreyssai had in mind
- what the *sensei* would consider too long, or too short.  Which
meant that the only way out was to just try for the genuine truth;
this would offer him the defense of honesty, little defense though
it was.  "One year, sensei?"

"Do you think it could be done in one month, Brennan?  In a case,
let us stipulate, where in principle you already have enough
experimental evidence to determine an answer, but not so much
experimental evidence that you can afford to make errors in
interpreting it."

Again, no way to guess which answer Jeffreyssai might *want...*
"One month seems like an unrealistically short time to me,
sensei."

"A *short time*?" Jeffreyssai said incredulously.  "How many
minutes in thirty days?  Hiriwa?"

"43200, sensei," she answered.  "If you assume sixteen-hour waking
periods and daily sleep, then 28800 minutes."

"Assume, Brennan, that it takes five whole minutes to think an
*original*thought, rather than learning it from someone else.  Does
even a major scientific problem require 5760 distinct insights?"

"I confess, sensei," Brennan said slowly, "that I have never
thought of it that way before... but do you tell me that is *truly*
a realistic level of productivity?"

"No," said Jeffreyssai, "but neither is it realistic to think that
a single problem requires 5760 insights.  And yes, it has been
done."

Jeffreyssai stepped back, and smiled benevolently.  Every student
in the room stiffened; they knew that smile.  "Though none of you
hit the particular answer that *I* had in mind, nonetheless your
answers were as reasonable as mine.  Except Styrlyn's, I'm afraid. 
Even Hiriwa's answer was not entirely wrong: the task of proposing
new theories was once considered a sacred duty reserved for those
of high status, there being a limited supply of problems in
circulation, at that time.  But *Brennan's* answer is
*particularly* interesting, and I am minded to test his theory of
motivation."

*Oh, hell,* Brennan said silently to himself.  Jeffreyssai was
gesturing for Brennan to stand up before the class.

When Brenann had risen, Jeffreyssai neatly seated himself in
Brennan's chair.

"Brennan-sensei," Jeffreyssai said, "you have five minutes to think
of something stunningly brilliant to say about the failure of Eld
science on quantum physics.  As for the rest of us, our job will be
to gaze at you expectantly.  I can only imagine how embarrassing it
will be, should you fail to think of anything good."

*Bastard.* Brennan didn't say it aloud.  Taji's face showed a
certain amount of sympathy; Styrlyn held himself aloof from the
game; but Yin was looking at him with sardonic interest.  Worse,
Hiriwa *was* gazing at him expectantly, assuming that he would rise
to the challenge.  And Jeffreyssai was gawking wide-eyed, waiting
for the guru's words of wisdom.  *Screw you, sensei.*

Brennan didn't panic.  It was very, very, very far from being the
scariest situation he'd ever faced.  He took a moment to decide how
to think; then thought.

At four minutes and thirty seconds, Brennan spoke.  (There was an
art to such things; as long as you were doing it anyway, you might
as well make it look easy.)

"A woman of wisdom," Brennan said, "once told me that it is wisest
to regard our past selves as fools beyond redemption - to see the
people we once were as idiots entire.  I do not necessarily say
this myself; but it is what she said to me, and there is more than
a grain of truth in it.  As long as we are making excuses for the
past, trying to make it look better, *respecting* it, we cannot
make a clean break.  It occurs to me that the rule may be no
different for human *civilizations*.  So I tried looking back and
considering the Eld scientists as simple fools."

"Which they were not," Jeffreyssai said.

"Which they were not," Brennan continued.  "In terms of raw
intelligence, they undoubtedly exceeded me.  But it occurred to me
that a difficulty in seeing what Eld scientists did wrong, might
have been in respecting the ancient and legendary names too
highly.  And that did indeed produce an insight."

"Enough introduction, Brennan," said Jeffreyssai.  "If you found an
insight, state it."

"Eld scientists were not trained..."  Brennan paused.  "No,
*untrained* is not the concept.  They were trained for the
*wrong task. *At that time, there were no Conspiracies, no secret
truths; as soon as Eld scientists solved a major problem, they
published the solution to the world and each other.  Truly scary
and confusing *open problems* would have been in extremely rare
supply, and used up the moment they were solved.  So it would not
have been possible to train Eld researchers
*to bring order out of scientific chaos.*  They would have been
trained for something else - I'm not sure what -"

"Trained to manipulate whatever science had *already* been
discovered," said Taji.  "It was a difficult enough task for Eld
teachers to train their students to *use existing knowledge,* or
follow already-known methodologies; that was all Eld science
teachers aspired to impart."

Brennan nodded.  "Which is a *very* different matter from creating
new science of their own.  The Eld scientists faced with problems
of quantum theory, might never have faced that kind of *fear*
before - the dismay of not knowing.  The Eld scientists might have
seized on unsatisfactory answers prematurely, because they were
accustomed to working with a neat, agreed-upon body of knowledge."

"*Good*, Brennan," murmured Jeffreyssai.

"But above all," Brennan continued, "an Eld scientist couldn't have
*practiced** *the actual problem the quantum scientists faced -
that of resolving a major confusion.  It was something you did once
per lifetime if you were lucky, and as Hiriwa observed, Newton
would no longer have been around.  So while the Eld physicists who
messed up quantum theory were not unintelligent, they were, in a
strong sense, *amateurs* - ad-libbing the whole process of paradigm
shift."

"And no probability theory," Hiriwa noted.  "So anyone who *did*
succeed at the problem would have no idea what they'd just done. 
They wouldn't be able to communicate it to anyone else, except
vaguely."

"Yes," Styrlyn said.  "And it was only a handful of people who
could tackle the problem at all, with no training in doing so;
those are the physicists whose names have passed down to us.  A
handful of people, making a handful of discoveries each.  It would
not have been enough to sustain a community.  Each Eld scientist
tackling a new paradigm shift would have needed to rediscover the
rules from scratch."

Jeffreyssai rose from Brenann's desk.  "Acceptable, Brennan; you
surprise me, in fact. I shall have to give further thought to this
method of yours."  Jeffreyssai went to the classroom door, then
looked back.  "However, I did have in mind at least one *other*
major flaw of Eld science, which none of you suggested.  I expect
to receive a list of possible flaws tomorrow.  I expect the flaw I
have in mind to be on the list. You have 480 minutes, excluding
sleep time.  I see five of you here.  The challenge does not
require more than 480 insights to solve, nor more than 96 insights
in series."

And Jeffreyssai left the room.
