
# Thou Art Physics

[Three months ago](/lw/of/dissolving_the_question/) - jeebers, has
it really been that long? - I posed the following
[homework assignment](http://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Free_will): 
Do a stack trace of the human cognitive algorithms that produce
debates about 'free will'.  Note that this task is strongly
distinguished from arguing that free will does, or does not exist.

Now, as expected, the notion of
"[timeless physics](/lw/qp/timeless_physics/)" is causing people to
ask, "If the future is determined, how can our choices control
it?"  The wise reader can guess that
[it all adds up to normality](/lw/qz/living_in_many_worlds/); but
this leaves the question of *how.*

People hear:  "The universe runs like clockwork; physics is
deterministic; the future is fixed."  And their minds form an
causal network that looks like this:

[![Fwmevsphysics](/static/imported/2008/06/05/fwmevsphysics.png "Fwmevsphysics")](/static/imported/2008/06/05/fwmevsphysics.png)

Here we see the causes "Me" and "Physics", competing to determine
the state of the "Future" effect.  If the "Future" is fully
determined by "Physics", then obviously there is no room for it to
be affected by "Me".



This causal network is not an explicit philosophical belief.  It's
implicit - a background representation of the brain, controlling
which philosophical arguments seem "reasonable".  It just seems
like the way things *are.*

Every now and then, another neuroscience press release appears,
claiming that, because researchers used an fMRI to spot the brain
doing something-or-other during a decision process,
*it's not you who chooses, it's your brain.*

Likewise that old chestnut, "Reductionism undermines rationality
itself.  Because then, every time you said something, it wouldn't
be the result of *reasoning*about the evidence - it would be
[merely](/lw/oo/explaining_vs_explaining_away/) quarks bopping
around."

Of course the actual diagram should be:

[![Fwmeinphysics](/static/imported/2008/06/05/fwmeinphysics.png "Fwmeinphysics")](/static/imported/2008/06/05/fwmeinphysics.png)

Or better yet:

[![Fwallphysics](/static/imported/2008/06/05/fwallphysics.png "Fwallphysics")](/static/imported/2008/06/05/fwallphysics.png)

Why is this not obvious?  Because there are many
[levels of organization](/lw/on/reductionism/) that separate our
models of our thoughts - our emotions, our beliefs, our agonizing
indecisions, and our final choices - from our models of electrons
and quarks.

We can *intuitively*visualize that a hand is made of fingers (and
thumb and palm).  To ask whether it's *really* our hand that picks
something up, or *merely*our fingers, thumb, and palm, is
transparently a [wrong question](/lw/og/wrong_questions/).

But the gap between [physics and cognition](/lw/p3/angry_atoms/)
cannot be crossed by direct visualization.  No one can *visualize*
atoms making up a person, the way they can see fingers making up a
hand.

And so it requires *constant vigilance* to maintain your perception
of yourself as an entity *within physics*.

This vigilance is one of the great keys to philosophy, like the
[Mind Projection Fallacy](/lw/oi/mind_projection_fallacy/).  You
will recall that it is this point which I
[nominated](/lw/pg/where_philosophy_meets_science/) as having
tripped up the quantum physicists who failed to imagine macroscopic
decoherence; they did not think to apply the laws to *themselves*.

Beliefs, desires, emotions, morals, goals, imaginations,
anticipations, sensory perceptions, fleeting wishes, ideals,
temptations...  You might call this the "surface layer" of the
mind, the parts-of-self that people can see even without science. 
If I say, "It is not *you* who determines the future, it is your
*desires, plans, and actions* that determine the future", you can
readily see the part-whole relations.  It is immediately visible,
like fingers making up a hand. There are other part-whole relations
all the way down to physics, but they are not immediately visible.

"Compatibilism" is the philosophical position that "free will" can
be intuitively and satisfyingly defined in such a way as to be
compatible with deterministic physics.  "Incompatibilism" is the
position that free will and determinism are incompatible.

My position might perhaps be called "Requiredism."  When agency,
choice, control, and moral responsibility are cashed out in a
sensible way, they *require* determinism - at least some patches of
determinism within the universe.  If you choose, and plan, and act,
and bring some future into being, in accordance with your desire,
then all this requires a lawful sort of reality; you cannot do it
amid utter chaos.  There must be order over at least over those
parts of reality that are being controlled by you.  *You* are
within physics, and so you/physics have determined the future.  If
it were not determined by physics, it could not be determined by
you.

Or perhaps I should say, "If the future were not determined by
reality, it could not be determined by you," or "If the future were
not determined by something, it could not be determined by you." 
You don't need neuroscience or physics to push naive definitions of
free will into incoherence.  If the mind were not embodied in the
brain, it would be embodied in something else; there would be
*some real thing* that was a mind.  If the future were not
determined by physics, it would be determined by *something,* some
law, some order, some grand reality that included you within it.

But if the laws of physics control us, then how can we be said to
control ourselves?

Turn it around:  If the laws of physics did *not* control us, how
could we possibly control ourselves?

How could thoughts judge other thoughts, how could emotions
conflict with each other, how could one course of action appear
best, how could we pass from uncertainty to certainty about our own
plans, in the midst of utter chaos?

If we were not in reality, where could we be?

The future is determined by physics.  What kind of physics?  The
kind of physics that includes the actions of human beings.

People's choices are determined by physics.  What kind of physics?
The kind of physics that includes weighing decisions, considering
possible outcomes, judging them, being tempted, following morals,
rationalizing transgressions, trying to do better...

There is no point where a quark swoops in from Pluto and overrides
all this.

The thoughts of your decision process are all *real*, they are all
*something.*  But a thought is too big and complicated to be an
atom.  So thoughts are
[made of smaller things](/lw/on/reductionism/), and our name for
the stuff that stuff is made of, is "physics".

Physics underlies our decisions and includes our decisions, it does
not [explain them *away*](/lw/oo/explaining_vs_explaining_away/).

[To be continued](/lw/r1/timeless_control/)... when I take up the
issue of* **control* in a timeless universe.  As always, I suggest
that the reader should first try to
[solve the problem on their own](http://wiki.lesswrong.com/wiki/Free_will). 
Remember,
[physics adds up to normality](/lw/qz/living_in_many_worlds/);
[it's your cognitive algorithms that generate confusion](/lw/og/wrong_questions/).
