
# Timeless Causality

Julian Barbour believes that each configuration, each individual
point in configuration space, corresponds individually to an
experienced Now - that each instantaneous time-slice of a brain is
the carrier of a subjective experience.

On this point, I take it upon myself to disagree with Barbour.

There is a timeless formulation of causality, known to Bayesians,
which may glue configurations together even in a timeless
universe.  Barbour may not have studied this; it is not widely
studied.

Such causal links could be required for "computation" and
"consciousness" - whatever *those*are.  If so, we would not be
forced to conclude that a *single*configuration, encoding a brain
frozen in time, can be the bearer of an instantaneous experience. 
We could throw out time, and keep the concept of causal
computation.

There is an old saying:  "Correlation does not imply causation."  I
don't know if this is my own thought, or something I remember
hearing, but on seeing this saying, a phrase ran through my mind: 
*If correlation does not imply causation, what does?*

Suppose I'm at the top of a canyon, near a pile of heavy rocks.  I
throw a rock over the side, and a few seconds later, I hear a
crash.  I do this again and again, and it seems that the
rock-throw, and the crash, tend to *correlate;* to occur in the
presence of each other.  Perhaps the sound of the crash is causing
me to throw a rock off the cliff?  But no, this seems unlikely, for
then an effect would have to precede its cause.  It seems more
likely that throwing the rock off the cliff is causing the crash. 
If, on the other hand, someone observed me on the cliff, and saw a
flash of light, and then immediately afterward saw me throw a rock
off the cliff, they would suspect that flashes of light caused me
to throw rocks.

Perhaps correlation, plus *time*, can suggest a direction of
causality?

But we just threw out time.

You see the problem here.

Once, sophisticated statisticians believed this problem was
unsolvable.  Many thought it was unsolvable even *with*time. 
Time-symmetrical laws of physics didn't seem to leave room for
asymmetrical causality.  And in statistics, nobody thought there
was any way to *define* causality.  They could measure correlation,
and that was enough.  Causality was declared dead, and the famous
statistician R. A. Fisher testified that it was impossible to prove
that smoking cigarettes actually *caused*cancer.

Anyway...

[](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/05/28/causeundirected2.png)

[![Causeundirected\_2](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/05/28/causeundirected_2.png "Causeundirected_2")](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/05/28/causeundirected_2.png)

Let's say we have a data series, generated by taking snapshots over
time of two variables 1 and 2.  We have a large amount of data from
the series, laid out on a track, but we don't know the direction
of  *time* on the track.  On each round, the past values of 1 and 2
probabilistically generate the future value of 1, and then
separately probabilistically generate the future value of 2.  We
know this, but we don't know the actual laws.  We can try to infer
the laws by gathering statistics about which values of 1 and 2 are
adjacent to which other values of 1 and 2.  But we don't know the
global direction of time, yet, so we don't know if our statistic
relates the effect to the cause, or the cause to the effect.

When we look at an arbitrary value-pair and its neighborhood, let's
call the three slices L, M, and R for Left, Middle, and Right.

We are considering two hypotheses.  First, that causality could be
flowing from L to M to R:

[](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/05/28/causeright.png)

[![Causeright\_2](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/05/28/causeright_2.png "Causeright_2")](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/05/28/causeright_2.png)

Second, that causality could be flowing from R to M to L:

[![Causeleft\_3](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/05/28/causeleft_3.png "Causeleft_3")](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/05/28/causeleft_3.png)

As good Bayesians, we realize that to distinguish these two
hypotheses, we must find some kind of observation that is more
likely in one case than in the other.  But what might such an
observation be?

We can try to look at various slices M, and try to find
correlations between the values of M, and the values of L and R. 
For example, we could find that when M1 is in the + state, that R2
is often also in the + state.  But is this because R2 causes M1 to
be +, or because M1 causes R2 to be +?

If throwing a rock causes the sound of a crash, then the throw and
the crash will tend to occur in each other's presence.  But this is
also true if the sound of the crash causes me to throw a rock.  So
observing these correlations does not tell us the direction of
causality, unless we already know the direction of time.

[![Causeundirected\_2](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/05/28/causeundirected_2.png "Causeundirected_2")](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/05/28/causeundirected_2.png)

From looking at this undirected diagram, we can guess that M1 will
correlate to L1, M2 will correlate to R1, R2 will correlate to M2,
and so on; and all this will be true because there are lines
between the two nodes, regardless of which end of the line we try
to draw the arrow upon.  You can see the problem with trying to
derive causality from correlation!

Could we find that when M1 is +, R2 is *always* +, but that when R2
is +, M1 is not always +, and say, "M1 must be causing R2"?  But
this does not follow.  We said at the beginning that past values of
1 and 2 were generating future values of 1 and 2 in a probabilistic
way; it was nowhere said that we would give preference to laws that
made the future deterministic given the past, rather than vice
versa.  So there is nothing to make us prefer the hypothesis, "A +
at M1 always causes R2 to be +" to the hypothesis, "M1 can only be
+ in cases where its parent R2 is +".

Ordinarily, at this point, I would say:  "Now I am about to tell
you the answer; so if you want to try to work out the problem on
your own, you should do so now."  But in this case, some of the
greatest statisticians in history did not get it on their own, so
if you do not already know the answer, I am not really expecting
you to work it out.  Maybe if you remember half a hint, but not the
whole answer, you could try it on your own.  Or if you suspect that
your era will support you, you could try it on your own; I have
given you a tremendous amount of help by asking exactly the correct
question, and telling you that an answer is possible.

...

So!  Instead of thinking in terms of observations we could find,
and then trying to figure out if they might distinguish
asymmetrically between the hypotheses, let us examine a single
causal hypothesis and see if it implies any asymmetrical
observations.

Say the flow of causality is from left to right:

[![Causeright\_3](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/05/28/causeright_3.png "Causeright_3")](http://lesswrong.com/static/imported/2008/05/28/causeright_3.png)

Suppose that we *do* know L1 and L2, but we do *not* know R1 and
R2.  Will learning M1 tell us anything about M2?

That is, will we observe the
[conditional dependence](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/02/conditional-ind.html)

> P(M2|L1,L2) ≠ P(M2|M1,L1,L2)

to hold?  The answer, on the assumption that causality flows to the
right, and on the other assumptions previously given, is *no.*  "On
each round, the past values of 1 and 2 probabilistically generate
the future value of 1, and then separately probabilistically
generate the future value of 2."  So once we have L1 and L2, they
generate M1 independently of how they generate M2.

But if we did know R1 or R2, then, on the assumptions, learning M1
would give us information about M2.  Suppose that there are
siblings Alpha and Betty, cute little vandals, who throw rocks when
their parents are out of town.  If the parents are out of town,
then either Alpha or Betty might each, independently, decide to
throw a rock through my window.  If I *don't* know whether a rock
has been thrown through my window, and I know that Alpha didn't
throw a rock through my window, that doesn't affect my probability
estimate that Betty threw a rock through my window - they decide
independently.  But if I *know*my window is broken, and I know
Alpha *didn't* do it, then I can guess Betty is the culprit.  So
even though Alpha and Betty throw rocks independently of each
other, knowing the *effect* can epistemically entangle my beliefs
about the *causes.*

Similarly, if we didn't know L1 or L2, then M1 should give us
information about M2, because from the effect M1 we can infer the
state of its causes L1 and L2, and thence the effect of L1/L2 on
M2.  If I know that Alpha threw a rock, then I can guess that Alpha
and Betty's parents are out of town, and that makes it more likely
that Betty will throw a rock too.

Which all goes to say that, if causality is flowing from L to M to
R, we may indeed expect the conditional dependence

> P(M2|R1,R2) ≠ P(M2|M1,R1,R2)

to hold.

So if we observe, statistically, over many time slices:

> P(M2|L1,L2) = P(M2|M1,L1,L2)  
> P(M2|R1,R2) ≠ P(M2|M1,R1,R2)

Then we know causality is flowing from left to right; and
conversely if we see:

> P(M2|L1,L2) ≠ P(M2|M1,L1,L2)  
> P(M2|R1,R2) = P(M2|M1,R1,R2)

Then we can guess causality is flowing from right to left.

This trick used the assumption of probabilistic generators.  We
couldn't have done it if the series had been generated by bijective
mappings, i.e., if the future was deterministic given the past and
only one possible past was compatible with each future.

So this trick does not directly apply to reading causality off of
Barbour's Platonia (which is the name Barbour gives to the timeless
mathematical object that is our universe).

However, think about the situation if humanity sent off
colonization probes to distant superclusters, and then the
accelerating expansion of the universe put the colonies over the
cosmological horizon from us.  There would then be distant human
colonies that could not speak to us again:  Correlations in a case
where light, going *forward,* could not reach one colony from
another, or reach any common ground.

On the other hand, we would be *very* surprised to reach a distant
supercluster billions of light-years away, and find a spaceship
just arriving from the *other* side of the universe, sent from
another independently evolved Earth, which had developed
genetically compatible indistinguishable humans who speak English. 
(A la way too much horrible sci-fi television.)  We would not
expect such extraordinary *similarity* of events, in a historical
region where a ray of light could not yet have reached there from
our Earth, nor a ray of light reached our Earth from there, nor
could a ray of light reached both Earths from any mutual region
between.  On the assumption, that is, that rays of light travel in
the direction we call "forward".

When two regions of spacetime are timelike separated, we cannot
deduce any direction of causality from similarities between them;
they could be similar because one is cause and one is effect, or
vice versa.  But when two regions of spacetime are spacelike
separated, and far enough apart that they have no common causal
ancestry *assuming* one direction of physical causality, but
*would* have common causal ancestry assuming a *different*
direction of physical causality, then similarity between them... is
at least highly suggestive.

I am not skilled enough in causality to translate probabilistic
theorems into bijective deterministic ones.  And by calling certain
similarities "surprising" I have secretly imported a probabilistic
view; I have made myself uncertain so that I can be surprised.

But Judea Pearl himself believes that the arrows of his graphs are
more fundamental than the statistical correlations they *produce*;
he has said so in an essay entitled
"[Why I Am Only A Half-Bayesian](http://ftp.cs.ucla.edu/pub/stat_ser/r284-reprint.pdf)". 
Pearl thinks that his arrows reflect reality, and hence, that there
is more to inference than just raw probability distributions.  If
Pearl is right, then there is no reason why you could not have
directedness in bijective deterministic mappings as well, which
would manifest in the same sort of similarity/dissimilarity rules I
have just described.

This does not bring back time.  There is no *t* coordinate, and no
global *now* sweeping across the universe.  Events do not happen in
the *past* or the *present* or the *future,* they just *are.*  But
there may be a certain... *asymmetric locality of relatedness...*
that preserves "cause" and "effect", and with it, "therefore".  A
point in configuration space would never be "past" or "present" or
"future", nor would it have a "time" coordinate, but it might be
"cause" or "effect" to another point in configuration space.

I am aware of the standard argument that anything resembling an
"arrow of time" should be made to stem strictly from the second law
of thermodynamics and the low-entropy initial condition.  But if
you throw out causality along with time, it is hard to see how a
low-entropy *terminal* condition and high-entropy *initial*
condition could produce the same pattern of similar and dissimilar
regions.  Look at in another way:  To compute a consistent universe
with a low-entropy terminal condition and high-entropy initial
condition, you have to simulate lots and lots of universes, then
throw away all but a tiny fraction of them that end up with low
entropy at the end.  With a low-entropy initial condition, you can
compute it out locally, without any global checks.  So I am not yet
ready to throw out the arrowheads on my arrows.

And, if we have "therefore" back, if we have "cause" and "effect"
back - and science would be somewhat forlorn without them - then we
can hope to retrieve the concept of "computation".  We are not
forced to grind up reality into disconnected configurations; there
can be glue between them.  We can require the amplitude relations
between connected volumes of configuration space, to carry out some
kind of timeless computation, before we decide that it contains the
timeless Now of a conscious mind.  We are not forced to associate
experience with an isolated point in configuration space - which is
a good thing from my perspective, because it doesn't seem to me
that a frozen brain with all the particles in fixed positions ought
to be having experiences.  I would sooner associate experience with
the arrows than the nodes, if I had to pick one or the other!  I
would sooner associate consciousness with the *change in* a brain
than with the brain itself, if I had to pick one or the other.

This also lets me keep, for at least a little while longer, the
concept of a conscious mind being connected to its future Nows, and
[anticipating some future experiences rather than others](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/04/where-experienc.html). 
Perhaps I will have to throw out this idea eventually, because I
cannot seem to formulate it consistently; but for now, at least, I
still cannot do without the notion of a "conditional probability". 
It still seems to me that there is some actual *connection* that
makes it more likely for *me* to wake up tomorrow as Eliezer
Yudkowsky, than as Britney Spears.  If I am in the arrows even more
than the nodes, that gives me a direction, a timeless flow.  This
may possibly be naive, but I am sticking with it until I can jump
to an alternative that is less confusing than my present confused
state of mind.

Don't think that any of this preserves *time,* though, or
distinguishes the past from the future.  I am just holding onto
*cause* and *effect* and *computation* and even *anticipation* for
a little while longer.
