
# Timeless Beauty

One of the great surprises of humanity's early study of physics was
that there were [universal laws](/lw/hr/universal_law/), that the
heavens were governed by the same order as the Earth:  Laws that
hold in all times, in all places, without known exception.
Sometimes we discover a seeming exception to the old law, like
Mercury's precession, but soon it turns out to perfectly obey a
still deeper law, that once again is universal as far as the eye
can see.

Every known law of *fundamental*physics is perfectly global. We
know no law of fundamental physics that applies on Tuesdays but not
Wednesdays, or that applies in the Northern hemisphere but not the
Southern.

In classical physics, the laws are universal; but there are also
other entities that are neither perfectly global nor perfectly
local. Like the case I discussed yesterday, of an entity called
"the lamp" where "the lamp" is OFF at 7:00am but ON at 7:02am; the
lamp entity extends through time, and has different values at
different times.  The little billiard balls are like that in
classical physics; a classical billiard ball is (alleged to be) a
fundamentally existent entity, but it has a world-*line*, not a
world-*point.*

In timeless physics,
**everything that exists is either perfectly global or perfectly local**. 
The laws are perfectly global.  The configurations are perfectly
local - every possible arrangement of particles has a *single*
complex amplitude assigned to it, which never changes from one time
to another.  Each configuration only affects, and is affected by,
its immediate neighbors.  Each actually existent thing is perfectly
unique, as a mathematical entity.

Newton, first to combine the Heavens and the Earth with a truly
universal generalization, saw a clockwork universe of moving
billiard balls and their world-lines, governed by perfect
exceptionless laws. Newton was the first to look upon a greater
beauty than any mere religion had ever dreamed.

But the beauty of classical physics doesn't begin to compare to the
beauty of timeless quantum physics.

Timeful quantum physics is pretty, but it's not all that much
pretti*er* than classical physics.  In timeful physics the "same
configuration" can still have different values at different times,
its own little world-line, like a lamp switching from OFF to ON. 
There's that ugly *t* complicating the equations.

You can see the beauty of timeless quantum physics by noticing how
much easier it is to *mess up* the perfection, if you try to tamper
with Platonia.

Consider the [collapse interpretation](/lw/q6/collapse_postulates/)
of quantum mechanics.  To people raised on timeful quantum physics,
"the collapse of the wavefunction" sounds like it might be a
plausible physical mechanism.

If you step back and look upon the timeless mist over the entire
configuration space, all dynamics manifest in its perfectly local
relations, then the "pruning" process of collapse suddenly shows up
as a hugely ugly discontinuity in the timeless object.  Instead of
a continuous mist, we have something that looks like a maimed tree
with branches hacked off and sap-bleeding stumps left behind.  The
perfect locality is ruined, because whole branches are hacked off
in one operation.  Likewise, collapse destroys the perfect global
uniformity of the laws that relate each configuration to its
neighborhood; sometimes we have the usual relation of amplitude
flow, and then sometimes we have the collapsing-relation instead.

This is the [power of beauty](/lw/mt/beautiful_probability/):  The
more beautiful something is, the more obvious it becomes when you
mess it up.

I was surprised that many of yesterday's commenters seemed to think
that Barbour's timeless physics was nothing new, relative to the
older idea of a Block Universe.  3+1D Minkowskian spacetime has no
privileged space of simultaneity, which, in its own way, seems to
require you to throw out the concept of a global *now*. From
Minkowskian 3+1, I had the idea of "time as a single perfect 4D
crystal" - I didn't know the phrase "Block Universe", but seemed
evident enough.

Nonetheless, I did not *really*get timelessness until I read
Barbour.  Saying that the *t* coordinate was just another
coordinate, didn't have nearly the same impact on me as tossing the
*t* coordinate out the window.

Special Relativity is widely accepted, but that doesn't stop people
from talking about "nonlocal collapse" or "retrocausation" -
relativistic *timeful* QM isn't beautiful enough to protect itself
from complication.

Shane Legg's
[reaction](http://www.overcomingbias.com/2008/05/timeless-physic.html#comment-116488178)
is the effect I was looking for:

> "Stop it!  If I intuitively took on board your timeless MWI view of
> the world... well, I'm worried that this might endanger my illusion
> of consciousness.  Thinking about it is already making me feel a
> bit weird."

I wish I knew whether the unimpressed commenters got what Shane
Legg did, just from hearing about Special Relativity; or if they
still haven't gotten it *yet* from reading my brief summary of
Barbour.

But in any case, let me talk in principle about why it helps to
toss out the *t* coordinate:

To [reduce](/lw/on/reductionism/) a thing, you must reduce it to
something that does not itself have the property you want to
explain.

In old-school Artificial Intelligence, a researcher wonders where
the [meaning](/lw/nq/feel_the_meaning/) of a word like "apple"
comes from.  They want to get knowledge about "apples" into their
beloved AI system, so they create a LISP token named **apple**. 
They realize that if they claim the token is meaningful of itself,
they have not really *reduced* the nature of meaning...  So they
*assert* that "the **apple** token is not meaningful by itself",
and then go on to say, "The meaning of the **apple** token emerges
from its network of connections to other tokens."  This is not true
[reductionism](/lw/on/reductionism/).  It is
[wrapping up your confusion in a gift-box](/lw/iu/mysterious_answers_to_mysterious_questions/).

To [reduce](/lw/on/reductionism/) time, you must reduce it to
something that is not time.  It is not enough to take the *t*
coordinate, and say that it is "just another dimension".  So long
as the *t* coordinate is there, it acts as a mental sponge that can
soak up all the time-ness that you want to explain.  If you toss
out the *t* coordinate, you are forced to see time as something
else, and not just see time as
"[time](/lw/nv/replace_the_symbol_with_the_substance/)".

Tomorrow (if I can shake today's cold) I'll talk about one of my
points of departure from Barbour:  Namely, I have no problem with
discarding time and keeping *causality.*  The commenters who
complained about Barbour grinding up the universe into disconnected
slices, may be reassured:  On this point, I think Barbour is trying
too hard.  We can discard *t*, and still keep causality *within*
**r**.

I dare to disagree with Barbour, on this point, because it seems
plausible that Barbour has not studied Judea Pearl and colleagues'
formulation of [causality](http://bayes.cs.ucla.edu/BOOK-2K/) -

- which likewise makes no use of a *t* coordinate.

Pearl et. al.'s formulation of "causality" would not be anywhere
*near*as enlightening, if they had to put *t* coordinates on
everything for the math to make sense.  Even if the authors
insisted that *t* was "just another property" or "just another
number"... well, if you've read Pearl, you see my point.  It would
correspond to a much weaker understanding.
