
# Where Physics Meets Experience

Once upon a time, there was an alien species, whose planet hovered
in the void of a universe with laws almost like our own.  They
would have been alien to us, but of course they did not think of
*themselves* as alien.  They communicated via rapid flashes of
light, rather than sound.  We'll call them the Ebborians.

Ebborians reproduce by fission, an adult dividing into two new
individuals.  They share genetic material, but not through sexual
recombination; Ebborian adults swap genetic material with each
other.  They have two eyes, four legs, and two hands, letting a
fissioned Ebborian survive long enough to regrow.

Human DNA is built in a double helix; unzipping the helix a little
at a time produces two stretches of single strands of DNA.  Each
single strand attracts complementary bases, producing a new double
strand.  At the end of the operation, a DNA double helix has turned
into two double helices.  Hence earthly life.

Ebborians fission their brains, as well as their bodies, by a
process something like how human DNA divides.

Imagine an Ebborian brain as a flat sheet of paper, computing in a
way that is more electrical than chemical - charges flowing down
conductive pathways.

When it's time for an Ebborian to fission, the brain-paper splits
down its thickness into two sheets of paper.  Each new sheet is
capable of conducting electricity on its own.  Indeed, the
Ebborian(s) stays conscious throughout the whole fissioning
process.  Over time, the brain-paper grows thick enough to fission
again.

Electricity flows through Ebborian brains faster than human neurons
fire.  But the Ebborian brain is constrained by its
two-dimensionality.  An Ebborian brain-paper must split down its
thickness while retaining the integrity of its program.  Ebborian
evolution took the cheap way out: the brain-paper computes in a
purely two-dimensional way.  The Ebborians have much faster
neuron-equivalents, but they are far less interconnected.

On the whole, Ebborians think faster than humans and remember
less.  They are less susceptible to habit; they recompute what we
would [cache](/lw/k5/cached_thoughts/).  They would be incredulous
at the idea that a human neuron might be connected to a thousand
neighbors, and equally incredulous at the idea that our axons and
dendrites propagate signals at only a few meters per second.

The Ebborians have no concept of parents, children, or sexuality. 
Every adult Ebborian remembers fissioning many times.  But Ebborian
memories quickly fade if not used; no one knows the last common
ancestor of those now alive.

In principle, an Ebborian personality can be immortal.  Yet an
Ebborian remembers less life than a seventy-year-old human.  They
retain only the most important highlights of their last few
millennia.  Is this immortality?  Is it death?

The Ebborians had to rediscover natural selection from scratch,
because no one retained their memories of being a fish.

But I digress from my tale.

Today, the Ebborians have gathered to celebrate a day which all
present will remember for hundreds of years.  They have discovered
(they believe) the Ultimate Grand Unified Theory of Everything for
their universe.  The theory which seems, at last, to explain every
known *fundamental*physical phenomenon - to predict what every
instrument will measure, in every experiment whose initial
conditions are exactly known, and which can be calculated on
available computers.

"But wait!" cries an Ebborian.  (We'll call this one Po'mi.)  "But
wait!", cries Po'mi, "There are still questions the Unified Theory
can't answer!  During the fission process, when *exactly* does
*one* Ebborian consciousness become *two* separate people?"

The gathered Ebborians look at each other.  Finally, there speaks
the moderator of the gathering, the second-foremost Ebborian on the
planet: the much-respected Nharglane of Ebbore, who achieved his
position through consistent gentleness and courtesy.

"Well," Nharglane says, "I admit I can't answer that one - but is
it really a question of *fundamental* physics?"

"I wouldn't even call that a 'question'," snorts De'da the
Ebborian, "seeing as how there's no experimental test whose result
depends on the answer."

"On the contrary," retorts Po'mi, "all our experimental results
ultimately come down to our *experiences.*  If a theory of physics
can't predict what we'll experience, what good is it?"

De'da shrugs.  "One person, two people - how does that make a
difference even to *experience?*  How do you tell even
*internally*whether you're one person or two people?  Of course, if
you look over and see your other self, you know you're finished
dividing - but by that time your brain has long since finished
splitting."

"Clearly," says Po'mi, "at any given point, *whatever* is having an
experience is one person.  So it is never necessary to tell whether
you are one person or two people.  *You* are always one person. 
But at any given time during the split, does there exist another,
*different* consciousness as yet, with its own awareness?"

De'da performs an elaborate quiver, the Ebborian equivalent of
waving one's hands.  "When the brain splits, it splits fast enough
that there isn't much time where the question would be ambiguous. 
One instant, all the electrical charges are moving as a whole.  The
next instant, they move separately."

"That's not true," says Po'mi.  "You can't sweep the problem under
the rug that easily.  There is a quite appreciable time - many
picoseconds - when the two halves of the brain are within distance
for the moving electrical charges in each half to tug on the
other.  Not quite causally separated, and not quite the same
computation either.  Certainly there is a time when there is
definitely one person, and a time when there is definitely two
people.  But at which *exact* point in between are there two
distinct conscious experiences?"

"My challenge stands," says De'da.  "How does it make a difference,
even a difference of *first-person* experience, as to *when* you
say the split occurs?  There's no third-party experiment you can
perform to tell you the answer.  And no difference of first-person
experience, either.  Your belief that consciousness must 'split' at
some particular point, stems from trying to model consciousness as
a big rock of awareness that can only be in one place at a time. 
There's no third-party experiment, and no first-person experience,
that can tell you when you've split; the question is meaningless."

"If experience is meaningless," retorts Po'mi, "then so are all our
scientific theories, which are merely intended to *explain* our
experiences."

"If I may," says another Ebborian, named Yu'el, "I think I can
refine my honorable colleague Po'mi's dilemma.  Suppose that you
anesthetized one of us -"

(Ebborians use an anesthetic that effectively shuts off electrical
power to the brain - no processing or learning occurs while an
Ebborian is anesthetized.)

"- and then flipped a coin.  If the coin comes up heads, you split
the subject while they are unconscious.  If the coin comes up
tails, you leave the subject as is.  When the subject goes to
sleep, should they anticipate a 2/3 probability of seeing the coin
come up heads, or anticipate a 1/2 probability of seeing the coin
come up heads?  If you answer 2/3, then there is a difference of
anticipation that *could* be made to depend on exactly when you
split."

"Clearly, then," says De'da, "the answer is 1/2, since answering
2/3 gets us into paradoxical and ill-defined issues."

Yu'el looks thoughtful.  "What if we split you into 512 parts while
you were anesthetized?  Would you still answer a probability of 1/2
for seeing the coin come up heads?"

De'da shrugs.  "Certainly.  When I went to sleep, I would figure on
a 1/2 probability that I wouldn't get split at all."

"Hmm..." Yu'el says.  "All right, suppose that we are definitely
going to split you into 16 parts.  3 of you will wake up in a red
room, 13 of you will wake up in a green room.  Do you anticipate a
13/16 probability of waking up in a green room?"

"I anticipate waking up in a green room with near-1 probability,"
replies De'da, "and I anticipate waking up in a red room with
near-1 probability.  My future selves will experience both
outcomes."

"But I'm asking about your *personal* anticipation," Yu'el
persists.  "When you fall asleep, how much do you *anticipate*
seeing a green room?  You can't see both room colors at once -
that's not an experience anyone will have - so which color do you
personally anticipate more?"

De'da shakes his head.  "I can see where this is going; you plan to
ask what I anticipate in cases where I may or may not be split. 
But I must deny that your question has an objective answer,
precisely *because*of where it leads.  Now, I do say to you, that I
*care* about my future selves.  If you ask me whether I would like
each of my green-room selves, or each of my red-room selves, to
receive ten dollars, I will of course choose the green-roomers -
but I don't care to follow this notion of 'personal anticipation'
where you are taking it."

"While you are anesthetized," says Yu'el, "I will flip a coin; if
the coin comes up heads, I will put 3 of you into red rooms and 13
of you into green rooms.  If the coin comes up tails, I will
reverse the proportion.  If you wake up in a green room, what is
your *posterior probability* that the coin came up heads?"

De'da pauses.  "Well..." he says slowly, "Clearly, some of me will
be wrong, no matter which reasoning method I use - but if you offer
me a bet, I can minimize the number of me who bet *poorly*, by
using the general policy, of each self *betting as if* the
posterior probability of their color dominating is 13/16.  And if
you try to make *that* judgment depend on the details of the
splitting process, then it just depends on how whoever
*offers the bet* counts Ebborians."

Yu'el nods.  "I can see what you are saying, De'da.  But I just
can't make myself believe it, at least not yet.  If there were to
be 3 of me waking up in red rooms, and a billion of me waking up in
green rooms, I would quite strongly *anticipate* seeing a green
room when I woke up.  Just the same way that I anticipate *not*
winning the lottery.  And if the proportions of three red to a
billion green, followed from a coin coming up heads; but the
reverse proportion, of a billion red to three green, followed from
tails; and I woke up and saw a red room; why, then, I would be
nearly *certain* - on a quite personal level - that the coin had
come up tails."

"That stance exposes you to quite a bit of trouble," notes De'da.

Yu'el nods.  "I can even see some of the troubles myself.  Suppose
you split brains only a short distance apart from each other, so
that they could, in principle, be *fused back together again?* 
What if there was an Ebborian with a brain thick enough to be split
into a million parts, and the parts could then re-unite?  Even if
it's not biologically possible, we could do it with a
computer-based mind, someday.  Now, suppose you split me into
500,000 brains who woke up in green rooms, and 3 much thicker
brains who woke up in red rooms.  I would surely anticipate seeing
the green room.  But most of me who see the green room will see
nearly the same thing - different in tiny details, perhaps, enough
to differentiate our experience, but such details are soon
forgotten.  So now suppose that my 500,000 green selves are
reunited into one Ebborian, and my 3 red selves are reunited into
one Ebborian.  Have I just sent nearly all of my "subjective
probability" into the green future self, even though it is now only
one of two?  With only a little more work, you can see how a
*temporary*expenditure of computing power, or a nicely refined
brain-splitter and a dose of anesthesia, would let you have a high
*subjective probability* of winning any lottery.  At least any
lottery that involved splitting you into pieces."

De'da furrows his eyes.  "So have you not just proved your own
theory to be nonsense?"

"I'm not sure," says Yu'el.  "At this point, I'm not even sure the
conclusion is wrong."

"I didn't suggest your conclusion was *wrong,*" says De'da, "I
suggested it was *nonsense.*  There's a difference."

"Perhaps," says Yu'el.  "Perhaps it will indeed turn out to be
nonsense, when I know better.  But if so, I don't quite know better
*yet.*  I can't quite see how to eliminate the notion of
*subjective anticipation* from my view of the universe.  I would
need something to replace it, something to re-fill the *role* that
anticipation currently plays in my worldview."

De'da shrugs.  "Why not just eliminate 'subjective anticipation'
outright?"

"For one thing," says Yu'el, "I would then have no way to express
my surprise at the orderliness of the universe.  Suppose you
claimed that the universe was actually made up entirely of random
experiences, brains temporarily coalescing from dust and
experiencing all possible sensory data.  Then if I don't count
individuals, or weigh their existence *somehow*, that chaotic
hypothesis would predict my existence as strongly as does science. 
The realization of all possible chaotic experiences would predict
my own experience with probability 1.  I need to keep my surprise
at having *this particular* orderly experience, to justify my
anticipation of seeing an orderly future.  If I throw away the
notion of subjective anticipation, then how do I differentiate the
chaotic universe from the orderly one?  Presumably there are
Yu'els, somewhere in time and space (for the universe is spatially
infinite) who are about to have a really chaotic experience.  I
need some way of saying that these Yu'els are *rare,* or
*weigh little* - some way of *mostly*anticipating that I won't
sprout wings and fly away.  I'm not saying that my *current*way of
doing this is good bookkeeping, or even *coherent* bookkeeping; but
I can't just *delete* the bookkeeping without a more solid
understanding to put in its place.  I need some way to say that
there are versions of me who see one thing, and versions of me who
see something else, but there's *some* kind of different weight on
them.  Right now, what I try to do is count copies - but I don't
know *exactly*what constitutes a copy."

Po'mi clears his throat, and speaks again.  "So, Yu'el, you agree
with me that there exists a definite and factual question as to
exactly when there are two conscious experiences, instead of one."

"That, I do not concede," says Yu'el.  "All that I have said may
only be a recital of my own confusion.  You are too quick to fix
the language of your beliefs, when there are words in it that, by
your own admission, you do not understand.  No matter how
fundamental your experience *feels*to you, it is not safe to
*trust* that feeling, until experience is no longer something you
are *confused* about.  There is a black box here, a mystery. 
Anything could be inside that box - any sort of surprise - a shock
that shatters everything you currently believe about
consciousness.  Including upsetting your belief that experience is
fundamental.  In fact, that strikes me as a surprise you should
anticipate - though it will still come as a shock."

"But then," says Po'mi, "do you at least agree that if our physics
does not specify *which* experiences are experienced, or how many
of them, or how much they 'weigh', then our physics must be
incomplete?"

"No," says Yu'el, "I don't concede that either.  Because consider
that, even if a physics is *known* - even if we construct a
universe with very simple physics, much simpler than our own
Unified Theory - I can *still* present the same split-brain
dilemmas, and they will still seem just as puzzling.  This suggests
that the source of the confusion is not in our theories of
*fundamental*physics.  It is on a higher level of organization.  We
can't compute exactly how proteins will fold up; but this is not a
deficit in our theory of atomic dynamics, it is a deficit of
computing power.  We don't know what makes *sharkras*bloom only in
spring; but this is not a deficit in our Unified Theory, it is a
deficit in our biology - we don't possess the technology to take
the *sharkras*apart on a molecular level to find out how they
work.  What you are pointing out is a gap in our science of
consciousness, which would present us with just the same puzzles
even if we knew *all* the fundamental physics.  I see no work here
for *physicists,* at all."

Po'mi smiles faintly at this, and is about to reply, when a
listening Ebborian shouts, "What, have you begun to believe in
zombies?  That when you specify all the physical facts about a
universe, there are facts about consciousness left over?"

"No!" says Yu'el.  "Of course not!  You can know the *fundamental*
physics of a universe, hold all the *fundamental* equations in your
mind, and still not have *all* the physical facts.  You may not
know why *sharkras*bloom in the summer.  But if you could actually
hold the entire fundamental physical state of the *sharkra*in your
mind, and understand all its levels of organization, then you would
necessarily know why it blooms - there would be no fact left over,
from outside physics.  When I say, 'Imagine running the split-brain
experiment in a universe with simple known physics,' you are not
*concretely* imagining that universe, in every detail.  You are not
*actually* specifying the entire physical makeup of an Ebborian in
your imagination.  You are only *imagining* that you know it.  But
if you *actually*knew how to build an entire conscious being from
scratch, out of paperclips and rubberbands, you would have a
*great deal* of knowledge that you do not presently have.  This is
*important* information that you are missing!  *Imagining* that you
have it, does not give you the insights that would follow from
*really* knowing the full physical state of a conscious being."

"So," Yu'el continues, "We can *imagine* ourselves knowing the
fundamental physics, and imagine an Ebborian brain splitting, and
find that we don't know exactly when the consciousness has split. 
Because we are not *concretely* imagining a *complete and detailed*
description of a conscious being, with full comprehension of the
implicit higher levels of organization.  There are knowledge gaps
here, but they are not gaps of *physics.*  They are gaps in our
understanding of consciousness.  I see no reason to think that
*fundamental* physics has *anything to do with* such questions."

"Well then," Po'mi says, "I have a puzzle I should like you to
explain, Yu'el.  As you know, it was discovered not many years ago,
that our universe has four spatial dimensions, rather than three
dimensions, as it first appears."

"Aye," says Nharglane of Ebbore, "this was a key part in our
working-out of the Unified Theory.  Our models would be utterly at
a loss to account for observed experimental results, if we could
not model the fourth dimension, and differentiate the
fourth-dimensional density of materials."

"And we also discovered," continues Po'mi, "that our very planet of
Ebbore, including all the people on it, has a four-dimensional
thickness, and is constantly fissioning along that thickness, just
as our brains do.  Only the fissioned sides of our planet do not
remain in contact, as our new selves do; the sides separate into
the fourth-dimensional void."

Nharglane nods.  "Yes, it was rather a surprise to realize that the
whole *world* is duplicated over and over.  I shall remember that
realization for a long time indeed.  It is a good thing we
Ebborians had our experience with self-fissioning, to prepare us
for the shock.  Otherwise we might have been driven mad, and
embraced absurd physical theories."

"Well," says Po'mi, "when the world splits down its
four-dimensional thickness, it does not always split exactly
evenly.  Indeed, it is not uncommon to see nine-tenths of the
four-dimensional thickness in one side."

"Really?" says Yu'el.  "My knowledge of physics is not so great as
yours, but -"

"The statement is correct," says the respected Nharglane of
Ebbore.

"Now," says Po'mi, "if fundamental physics has nothing to do with
consciousness, can you tell me why the subjective probability of
finding ourselves in a side of the split world, should be exactly
proportional to the square of the thickness of that side?"

There is a great terrible silence.

"WHAT?" says Yu'el.

"WHAT?" says De'da.

"WHAT?" says Nharglane.

"WHAT?" says the entire audience of Ebborians.

*To be continued...*
