
# Where Experience Confuses Physicists

When we last met our heroes, the Ebborians, they were discussing
the known phenomenon in which the entire planet of Ebbore and all
its people splits down its fourth-dimensional thickness into two
sheets, just like an individual Ebborian brain-sheet splitting
along its third dimension.

And Po'mi has just asked:

> "Why should the subjective probability of finding ourselves in a
> side of the split world, be exactly proportional to the square of
> the thickness of that side?"

When the initial hubbub quiets down, the respected Nharglane of
Ebbore asks:  "Po'mi, what is it *exactly* that you found?"

"Using instruments of the type we are all familiar with," Po'mi
explains, "I determined when a splitting of the world was about to
take place, and in what proportions the world would split.  I found
that I could not predict *exactly* which world I would find myself
in -"

"Of course not," interrupts De'da, "you found yourself in *both*
worlds, every time -"

"- but I could predict *probabilistically* which world I would find
myself in.  Out of all the times the world was about to split 2:1,
into a side of two-thirds width and a side of one-third width, I
found myself on the thicker side around 4 times out of 5, and on
the thinner side around 1 time out of 5.  When the world was about
to split 3:1, I found myself on the thicker side 9 times out of 10,
and on the thinner side 1 time out of 10."

"Are you *very sure* of this?" asks Nharglane.  "How much data did
you gather?"

Po'mi offers an overwhelming mountain of experimental evidence.

"I guess that settles that," mutters Nharglane.

"So you see," Po'mi says, "you were right after all, Yu'el, not to
eliminate 'subjective probability' from your worldview.  For if we
do not have a 4/5 subjective anticipation of *continuing into* the
thicker side of a 2:1 split, then how could we even *describe* this
rule?"

"A good question," says De'da.  "There ought to be *some* way of
phrasing your discovery, which eliminates this problematic concept
of 'subjective continuation'..."

The inimitable Ha'ro speaks up:  "You might say that we find
ourselves in a world in which the *remembered* splits obey the
squared-thickness rule, to within the limits of statistical
expectation."

De'da smiles.  "Yes, excellent!  That describes the evidence in
terms of recorded experimental results, which seems less
problematic than this 'subjective anticipation' business."

"Does that really buy us anything...?" murmurs Yu'el.  "We're not
limited to memories; we could perform the experiment again.  What,
on that next occasion, would you *anticipate* as your experimental
result?  If the thickness is split a hundred to one?  Afterward it
will be only a memory... but what about beforehand?"

"I think," says De'da, "that you have forgotten one of your own
cardinal rules, Yu'el.  Surely, what you *anticipate* is part of
your map, not the territory.  Your degree of anticipation is
partial information you possess; it is not a substance of the
experiment itself."

Yu'el pauses.  "Aye, that is one of my cardinal rules... but I like
my partial information to be *about* something.  Before I can
distinguish the map and the territory, I need a concept of the
territory.  What is my subjective anticipation *about*, in this
case?  I will *in fact* end up in both world-sides.  I can
calculate a certain probability to five decimal places, and verify
it experimentally - but what is it a probability *of?*"

"I know!" shouts Bo'ma.  "It's the probability that your *original*
self ends up on that world-side!  The other person is
*just a copy!*"

A great groan goes up from the assembled Ebborians.  "Not this
again," says De'da.  "Didn't we settle this during the Identity
Wars?"

"Yes," Yu'el says.  "There is no copy: there are two originals."

De'da shakes his head in disgust.  "And what are the odds that, out
of umpteen billion split Ebbores, *we* would be the originals at
this point?"

"But you can't deny," Bo'ma says smugly, "that my theory produces
good experimental predictions!  It explains our observations, and
that's all you can ask of any theory.  And so science vindicates
the Army of Original Warriors - we were right all along!"

"Hold on," says Yu'el.  "That theory doesn't actually *explain*
anything.  At all."

"What?" says Bo'ma.  "Of course it does.  I use it daily to make
experimental predictions; though *you* might not understand that
part, not being a physicist."

Yu'el raises an eye. 
"[Failure to explain anything](/lw/ip/fake_explanations/) is a
hard-to-notice phenomenon in scientific theories. 
[You have to pay close attention](/lw/if/your_strength_as_a_rationalist/),
or you'll miss it.  It was once thought that
[phlogiston theory](/lw/is/fake_causality/) predicted that wood,
when burned, would lose phlogiston and transform into ash; and
predicted that candles, burning in an enclosed space, would
saturate the air with phlogiston and then go out.  But these were
not *advance* predictions of phlogiston theory.  Rather, phlogiston
theorists saw those results, and then said 'Phlogiston did it.' 
Now why didn't people notice this right away?  Because that sort of
thing is actually surprisingly hard to notice."

"In this case," continues Yu'el, "you have given us a rule that the
*original* Ebborian has a probability of ending up in a world-side,
which is proportional to the squared thickness of the side.  We
originally had the mystery of where the squared-thickness rule came
from.  And now that you've offered us your rule, we have
[the *exact same mystery* as before](/lw/iu/mysterious_answers_to_mysterious_questions/). 
*Why* would each world have a squared-thickness probability of
receiving the original?  Why wouldn't the original consciousness
*always* go to the thicker world?  Or go with probability
*directly* proportional to thickness, instead of the square?  And
what does it even *mean* to be the original?"

"That doesn't matter," retorts Bo'ma.  "Let the equation *mean*
anything it likes, so long as it gives good experimental
predictions.  What is the meaning of an electrical charge?  Why is
it an electrical charge?  That doesn't matter; only the numbers
matter.  My law that the original ends up in a particular side,
with probability equaling the square of its thickness, gives good
numbers.  End of story."

Yu'el shakes his head.  "When I look over the raw structure of your
theory - the computer program that would correspond to this model -
it contains a strictly superfluous element.  You have to compute
the square of the thickness, and turn it into a probability, in
order to get *the chance that the original self goes there.*  Why
not just *keep that probability* as the experimental prediction? 
Why *further* specify that this is the *probability of*
original-ness?  Adding that last rule doesn't help you compute any
*better* experimental predictions; and it leaves all the original
mysteries intact.  Including Po'mi's question as to when exactly a
world splits.  And it adds the new mystery of why original-ness
should only end up in one world-side, with probability equal to the
square of the thickness."   Yu'el pauses.  "You might as well just
claim that all the split world-sides except one vanish from the
universe."

Bo'ma snorts.  "For a world-side to 'just vanish' would outright
violate the laws of physics. Why, if it all vanished in an instant,
that would mean the event occurred non-locally - faster than
light.  My suggestion about 'originals' and 'copies' doesn't
postulate unphysical behavior, whatever other criticisms you may
have."

Yu'el nods.  "You're right, that was unfair of me.  I apologize."

"Well," says Bo'ma, "how about this, then?  What if
'fourth-dimensional thickness', as we've been calling it, is
actually a *degree of partial information* about who we *really*
are?  And then when the world splits, we find out."

"Um... *what*?" says Yu'el.  "Are you sure you don't want to
rephrase that, or something?"

Bo'ma shakes his head.  "No, you heard me the first time."

"Okay," says Yu'el, "correct me if I'm wrong, but I thought I heard
Nharglane say that you had to do things like differentiate the
fourth-dimensional density in order to do your experimental
calculations.  That doesn't sound like probability theory to me. 
It sounds like physics."

"Right," Bo'ma says, "it's a quantity that propagates around with
wave mechanics that involve the differential of the density, but
it's *also* a degree of partial information."

"Look," Yu'el says, "if this 4D density business works the way you
say it does, it should be easy to set up a situation where there's
no *possible* 'fact as to who you really are' that is fixed in
advance but unknown to you, because the so-called 'answer' will
change depending on the so-called 'question' - "

"Okay," Bo'ma says, "forget the 'probability' part.  What if 4D
thickness is *the very stuff of reality itself?*  So how *real*
something is, equals the 4D thickness - no, pardon me, the square
of the 4D thickness.  Thus, some world-sides are quantitatively
*realer* than others, and that's why you're more likely to find
yourself in them."

"Why," says Yu'el, "is the *very stuff of reality itself*
manifesting as a physical quantity with its own wave mechanics? 
What's next, electrical charge as a degree of possibility?  And
besides, doesn't that violate -"

Then Yu'el pauses, and falls silent.

"What is it?" inquires Po'mi.

"I was about to say, wouldn't that violate the
[Generalized Anti-Zombie Principle](/lw/p9/the_generalized_antizombie_principle/),"
Yu'el replies slowly.  "Because then you could have a complete
mathematical model of our world, to be looked over by the Flying
Spaghetti Monster, and then *afterward*you would need to tell the
Flying Spaghetti Monster an *extra* postulate: 
*Things are real in proportion to the square of their fourth-dimensional thickness.* 
You could change that postulate, and leave everything
microphysically the same, but people would find... different
proportions of themselves?... in different places.  The difference
would be detectable *internally*... sort of... because the
inhabitants would *experience* the results in different
proportions, whatever that means.  They would see different things,
or at least see the same things in different relative amounts.  But
any third-party observer, looking over the universe, couldn't tell
which internal people were *more real,* and so couldn't discover
the statistics of experience."

De'da laughs.  "Sounds like a crushing objection to me."

"Only," says Yu'el, "is that really so different from believing
that you can have the whole mathematical structure of a world, and
then an *extra* fact as to whether that world happens to *exist* or
*not exist*?  Shouldn't *that* be ruled out by the Anti-Zombie
Principle too?  Shouldn't the Anti-Zombie Principle say that it was
logically impossible to have had a world physically identical to
our own, except that it *doesn't exist?*   Otherwise there could be
an abstract mathematical object structurally identical to this
world, but with *no experiences in it*, because*it doesn't exist*. 
And papers that philosophers wrote about subjectivity wouldn't
prove they were conscious, because the papers would also 'not
exist'."

"Um..." says an Ebborian in the crowd, "correct me if I'm mistaken,
but didn't you just solve the mystery of the First Cause?"

"You are mistaken," replies Yu'el.  "I can tell when I have
*solved* a mystery, because it stops being mysterious.  To cleverly
manipulate my own confusion is not to dissolve a problem.  It is an
interesting argument, and I may try to follow it further - but it's
not an *answer* until the confusion goes away."

"Nonetheless," says Bo'ma, "if you're allowed to say that some
worlds exist, and some worlds don't, why not have a degree of
existence that's *quantitative?*  And propagates around like a
wave, and then we have to square it to get an answer."

Yu'el snorts.  "Why not just let the 'degree of existence' be a
complex number, while you're at it?"

Bo'ma rolls his eyes.  "Please stop mocking me.  I can't even
*imagine*any possible experimental evidence which would point in
the direction of *that* conclusion.  You'd need a case where two
events that were real in opposite directions canceled each other
out."

"I'm sorry," says Yu'el, "I need to learn to control my tendency to
attack straw opponents.  But still, where would the squaring rule
come from?"

An Ebborian named Ev'Hu suggests, "Well, you could have a rule that
world-sides whose thickness tends toward zero, must have a degree
of reality that also tends to zero.  And then the rule which says
that you square the thickness of a world-side, would let the
probability tend toward zero as the world-thickness tended toward
zero.  QED."

"That's not QED," says Po'mi.  "That's a complete non-sequitur. 
Logical fallacy of
[affirming the consequent](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Affirming_the_consequent). 
You could have all *sorts* of rules that would let the reality tend
toward zero as the world-thickness tended toward zero, not just the
squaring rule.  You could approach the limit from many different
directions.  And in fact, *all*our world-sides have a thickness
that 'tends toward zero' because they keep splitting.  Furthermore,
why would an indefinite tendency in the infinite future have any
impact on what we do now?"

"The frequentist heresy," says Yu'el. "It sounds like some of their
scriptures.  But let's move on.  Does anyone have any *helpful*
suggestions?  Ones that don't just shuffle the mystery around?"

Ha'ro speaks.  "I've got one."

"Okay," Yu'el says, "this should be good."

"Suppose that when a world-side gets thin enough," Ha'ro says,
"[it cracks to pieces and falls apart](http://hanson.gmu.edu/mangledworlds.html). 
And then, when you did the statistics, it would turn out that the
vast majority of *surviving* worlds have splitting histories
similar to our own."

There's a certain unsettled pause.

"Ha'ro," says Nharglane of Ebbore, "to the best of my imperfect
recollection, that is the most disturbing suggestion any Ebborian
physicist has ever made in the history of time."

"Thank you very much," says Ha'ro.  "But it could also be that a
too-small world-side just sheds off in flakes when it splits,
rather than containing actual sentient beings who get to experience
a moment of horrified doom.  The too-small worlds merely fail to
exist, as it were.  Or maybe sufficiently small world-sides get
attracted to larger world-sides, and merge with them in a
continuous process, obliterating the memories of anything having
happened differently.  But *that's* not important, the *real*
question is whether the numbers would work out for the right size
limit, and in fact," Ha'ro waves some
[calculations](http://hanson.gmu.edu/worldhit.pdf) on a piece of
paper, "all you need is for the minimum size of a cohesive world to
be somewhere around the point where half the total
fourth-dimensional mass is above the limit -"

"Eh?" says Yu'el.

"I figured some numbers and they don't look too implausible and we
might be able to prove it, either from first-principles of 4D
physics showing that a cracking process occurs, or with some kind
of *really clever* experiment," amplifies Ha'ro.

"Sounds promising," says Yu'el.  "So if I get what you're saying,
there would be a *completely physical* explanation for why, when a
typical bunch of worlds split 2:1, there's around 4 times as many
cohesive worlds left that split from the thicker side, as from the
thinner side."

"Yes," says Ha'ro, "you just count the surviving worlds."

"And if the Flying Spaghetti Monster ran a simulation of our
universe's physics, the simulation would automatically include
observers that experienced the same things we did, with the same
statistical probabilities," says Yu'el.  "No extra postulates
required.  None of the quantities in the universe would need
additional characteristics beyond their strictly physical
structure.  Running any mathematically equivalent computer program
would do the trick - you wouldn't need to be told how to
*interpret* it a particular way."

Ha'ro nods.  "That's the general idea."

"Well, I don't know if that's *correct,*" says Yu'el.  "There's
some potential issues, as you know.  But I've got to say it's the
first suggestion I've heard that's even *remotely* helpful in
making all this seem any less mysterious."
