
# Where Philosophy Meets Science

Looking back on early quantum physics - not for purposes of
admonishing the major figures, or to claim that *we* could have
done better if we'd been born into that era; but in order to try
and learn a moral, and do better next time - looking back on the
dark ages of quantum physics, I say, I would nominate as the "most
basic" error...

...*not* that they tried to reverse course on the last three
thousand years of science suggesting that mind was complex
[within physics](/lw/p6/reductive_reference/) rather than
fundamental in physics.  This is Science, and we do have
revolutions here.  Every now and then you've got to reverse a
trend. 
[The future is always absurd](/lw/j6/why_is_the_future_so_absurd/)
and never unlawful.

I would nominate, as the basic error not to repeat next time, that
the early scientists forgot that they *themselves* were made out of
particles.

I mean, I'm sure that most of them knew it in theory.

And yet they didn't notice that putting a sensor to detect a
passing electron, or even *knowing* about the electron's history,
was an example of "particles in different places".  So they didn't
notice that a quantum theory of distinct configurations already
explained the experimental result, without any need to invoke
consciousness.

In the [ancestral environment](/lw/kr/an_alien_god/), humans were
often faced with the adaptively relevant task of predicting other
humans.  For which purpose you thought of your fellow humans as
having thoughts, knowing things and feeling things, rather than
thinking of them as being made up of particles.  In fact, many
hunter-gatherer tribes may not even have known that particles
existed. It's much more *intuitive* - it *feels*
[simpler](/lw/jp/occams_razor/) - to think about someone "knowing"
something, than to think about their brain's particles occupying a
different state.  It's easier to phrase your explanations in terms
of what *people know*; it feels more natural; it leaps more readily
to mind.

Just as, once upon a time, it was easier to imagine Thor throwing
lightning bolts, than to imagine Maxwell's Equations - even though
Maxwell's Equations can be described by a computer program vastly
smaller than the program for an intelligent agent like Thor.

So the ancient physicists found it natural to think, "I know where
the photon was... what difference could *that* make?"  Not, "My
brain's particles' current state correlates to the photon's
history... what difference could *that*make?"

And, similarly, because it felt easy and intuitive to model reality
in terms of people knowing things, and the decomposition of knowing
into brain states did not leap so readily to mind, it *seemed* like
a [simple theory](/lw/jp/occams_razor/) to say that a configuration
could have amplitude only "if you didn't know better".

To turn the dualistic quantum hypothesis into a *formal* theory -
one that could be written out as a computer program, without human
scientists deciding when an "observation" occurred - you would have
to specify what it meant for an "observer" to "know" something, in
terms your computer program could compute.

So is your theory of fundamental physics going to examine all the
particles in a human brain, and decide when those particles "know"
something, in order to compute the motions of particles?  But then
how do you compute the motion of the particles in the brain itself?
Wouldn't there be a potential infinite recursion?

But so long as the terms of the theory were being processed by
human scientists, they *just knew* when an "observation" had
occurred.  You said an "observation" occurred whenever it had to
occur in order for the experimental predictions to come out right -
a subtle form of constant tweaking.

(Remember, the basics of quantum theory were formulated before Alan
Turing said anything about Turing machines, and *way* before the
concept of computation was popularly known.  The distinction
between an effective formal theory, and one that required human
interpretation, was not as clear then as now.  Easy to pinpoint the
problems in hindsight; you shouldn't learn the lesson that problems
are usually this obvious in foresight.)

Looking back, it may *seem* like one meta-lesson to learn from
history, is that philosophy really matters in science - it's not
just some adjunct of a separate academic field.

After all, the early quantum scientists were doing all the right
experiments.  It was their interpretation that was off.  And the
problems of interpretation were not the result of their getting the
statistics wrong.

Looking back, it seems like the errors they made, were errors in
the kind of thinking that we would describe as, well,
"philosophical".

When we look back and ask, "How could the early quantum scientists
have
[done better](/lw/h8/tsuyoku_naritai_i_want_to_become_stronger/),
even in principle?" it seems that the insights they needed were
philosophical ones.

And yet it wasn't professional philosophers who swooped in and
solved the problem and cleared up the mystery and made everything
normal again.  It was, well, physicists.

Arguably, Leibniz was at least as foresightful about quantum
physics, as Democritus was once thought to have been foresightful
about atoms.  But that is hindsight.  It's the result of looking at
the solution, and thinking back, and saying, "Hey, Leibniz said
something like that."

Even where one philosopher gets it right in advance, it's usually
science that ends up *telling us* which philosopher is right - not
the *prior consensus* of the philosophical community.

I think this has something fundamental to say about the nature of
philosophy, and the interface between philosophy and science.

It was once said that every science begins as philosophy, but then
grows up and leaves the philosophical womb, so that at any given
time, "Philosophy" is what we haven't turned into science yet.

I suggest that when we look at the history of quantum physics, and
say, "The insights they needed were philosophical insights," what
we are *really* seeing, is that the insight they needed was of a
form that is not yet taught in standardized academic classes, and
not yet reduced to calculation.

Once upon a time, the notion of the scientific method - updating
beliefs based on experimental evidence - was a philosophical
notion. But it was not championed by professional philosophers.  It
was the real-world power of science that showed that scientific
epistemology was good epistemology, not a prior consensus of
philosophers.

Today, this philosophy of belief-updating is *beginning* to be
reduced to calculation - statistics, Bayesian probability theory.

But back in Galileo's era, it was solely *vague verbal arguments*
that said you should try to produce numerical predictions of
experimental results, rather than consulting the Bible or
Aristotle.

At the frontier of science, and especially, at the frontier of
scientific *chaos* and scientific *confusion*, you find problems of
thinking that are not taught in academic courses, and that have not
been reduced to calculation.  And this will seem like a domain of
philosophy; it will seem that you must do philosophical thinking in
order to sort out the confusion.  But when history looks back, I'm
afraid, it is usually not a professional philosopher who wins all
the marbles - because it takes intimate involvement with the
scientific domain in order to do the philosophical thinking.  Even
if, afterward, it all seems knowable *a priori*; and even if,
afterward, some philosopher out there actually *got* it *a priori*;
even so, it takes intimate involvement to see it in practice, and
experimental results to tell the world which philosopher won.

I suggest that,
[like ethics](http://www.singinst.org/blog/2007/10/21/should-ethicists-be-inside-or-outside-a-profession/),
philosophy really is important, but it is only practiced
effectively from *within* a science.  Trying to do the philosophy
of a frontier science, as a separate academic profession, is as
much a mistake as trying to have separate ethicists.  You end up
with ethicists who speak mainly to other ethicists, and
philosophers who speak mainly to other philosophers.

This is not to say that there is no place for professional
philosophers in the world.  Some problems are so chaotic that there
is no established place for them at all in the halls of science. 
But those "professional philosophers" would be very, very wise to
learn every scrap of relevant-seeming science that they can
possibly get their hands on.  They should not be surprised at the
prospect that experiment, and not debate, will finally settle the
argument.  They should not flinch from running their own
experiments, if they can possibly think of any.

That, I think, is the lesson of history.

PS:  Speaking of history, tonight is April 12, the anniversary of
Yuri's Night - Yuri Gagarin's first flight into space - and there
may be a [celebration](http://www.yurisnight.net/2008/) in your
area.
