
# Which Basis Is More Fundamental

For decades, quantum physics was vehemently asserted to be nothing
but a convenience of calculation.  The equations were not to be
interpreted as describing *reality*, though they made good
predictions for reasons that it was mere philosophy to question. 
This being the case, any quantity you could *define* seemed as
fundamentally real as any other quantity, which is to say, not real
at all.

Physicists have invented, for convenience of calculation, something
called a *momentum basis* of quantum mechanics.  Instead of having
a complex amplitude distribution over the positions of particles,
you had a complex amplitude distribution over their momenta.

The "momentum basis" contains all the information that is in the
"position basis", and the "position basis" contains all the
information that is in the "momentum basis".  Physicists use the
word "basis" for both, suggesting that they are on the same
footing: that positions are no better than momenta, or vice versa.

But, in my humble opinion, the two representations are *not* on an
equal footing when it comes to being "fundamental".

Physics in the position basis can be
[computed locally](/lw/pj/the_quantum_arena/). To determine the
instantaneous change of amplitude at a configuration, you only need
to look at its infinitesimal neighborhood.

The momentum basis cannot be computed locally.  Quantum evolution
depends on potential energy.  Potential energy depends on how far
apart things are from each other, like how high an apple is off the
ground. To figure out how far apart things are from each other, you
have to look at the entire momentum basis to recover the
positions.

The "momentum basis" is in some ways like a description of the
chessboard in which you have quantities like "the queen's position
minus the rook's position" and "the queen's position plus the
rook's position".  You can get back a description of the entire
chessboard - but the rules of the game are much harder to phrase. 
Each rule has to take into account many more facts, and there's no
longer an elegant local structure to the board.

Now the above analogy is not really fair, because the momentum
basis is not *that* inelegant.  The momentum basis is the Fourier
transform of the position basis, and symmetrically, the position
basis is the Fourier transform of the momentum basis.  They're
equally easy to extract from each other.  Even so, the momentum
basis has no local physics.

So if you think that the nature of reality seems to tend toward
local relations, local causality, or local anything, then the
position basis is a *better* candidate for being fundamentally
real.

What is this "nature of reality" that I'm talking about?

I sometimes talk about the Tao as being the distribution from which
our laws of physics were drawn - the alphabet in which our physics
was generated.  This is almost certainly a false concept, but it is
a useful one.

It was a very important *discovery,* in human history, that the Tao
wrote its laws in the language of mathematics, rather than heroic
mythology.  We had to *discover*the general proposition that
*equations*were better explanations for natural phenomena than
"Thor threw a lightning bolt".  (Even though Thor
[sounds](/lw/pg/where_philosophy_meets_science/)
[simpler](/lw/jp/occams_razor/) to humans than Maxwell's
Equations.)* *

Einstein seems to have discovered General Relativity almost
entirely on the basis of guessing what language the laws should be
written in, what properties they should have, rather than by
distilling vast amounts of experimental evidence into an empirical
regularity.  This is the strongest evidence I know of for the
pragmatic usefulness of the "Tao of Physics" concept.  If you get
*one* law, like Special Relativity, you can look at the language
it's written in, and infer what the *next* law ought to look like. 
If the laws are not being generated from the same language, they
surely have *something*in common; and this I refer to as the Tao.

Why "Tao"?  Because no matter how I try to describe the whole
business, when I look over the description, I'm pretty sure it's
wrong.  Therefore I call it the Tao.

One of the aspects of the Tao of Physics seems to be *locality.* 
(Markov neighborhoods, to be precise.)  Discovering this aspect of
the Tao was part of the great transition from Newtonian mechanics
to relativity.  Newton thought that gravity and light propagated at
infinite speed, action-at-a-distance.  Now that we know that
everything obeys a speed limit, we know that what happens at a
point in spacetime only depends on an immediate neighborhood of the
immediate past.

Ever since Einstein figured out that the Tao prefers its physics
local, physicists have successfully used the heuristic of
prohibiting *all* action-at-a-distance in their hypotheses.  We've
figured out that the Tao doesn't like it.  You can see how local
physics would be easier to compute... though the Tao has no
objection to wasting incredible amounts of computing power on
things like quarks and quantum mechanics.

The Standard Model includes many fields and laws.  Our physical
models require many equations and postulates to write out.  To the
best of our current knowledge, the laws still appear, if not
complicated, then not perfectly simple.

Why should *every* known behavior in physics be linear in quantum
evolution, local in space and time, Charge-Parity-Time symmetrical,
and
[conservative of probability density](/lw/o5/the_second_law_of_thermodynamics_and_engines_of/)? 
I don't know, but you'd have to be pretty stupid not to notice the
pattern.  A single exception, in any individual behavior of
physics, would destroy the generalization.  It seems like too much
coincidence.

So, yes, the position basis includes all the information of the
momentum basis, and the momentum basis includes all the information
of the position basis, and they give identical predictions.

But the momentum basis looks like... well, it looks like humans
took the *real*laws and rewrote them in a mathematically convenient
way that destroys the Tao's beloved locality.

That may be a poor way of putting it, but I don't know how else to
do so.

In fact, the position basis is also not a good candidate for being
*fundamentally* real, because it doesn't obey the relativistic
spirit of the Tao.  Talking about any particular position basis,
involves choosing an arbitrary space of simultaneity.  Of course,
transforming your description of the universe to a different space
of simultaneity, will leave all your experimental predictions
exactly the same.  But however the Tao of Physics wrote the real
laws, it seems *really unlikely* that they're written to use
Greenwich's space of simultaneity as the arbitrary standard, or
whatever.  Even if you can formulate a mathematically equivalent
representation that uses Greenwich space, it doesn't seem likely
that the Tao actually *wrote* it that way... if you see what I
mean.

I wouldn't be surprised to learn that there is some known better
way of looking at quantum mechanics than the position basis, some
view whose mathematical components are relativistically invariant
and locally causal.

But, for now, I'm going to stick with the observation that the
position basis is local, and the momentum basis is not, regardless
of how pretty they look side-by-side.  It's not that I think the
position basis is fundamental, but that it seems fundamental*er*.

The notion that every possible way of slicing up the amplitude
distribution is a "basis", and every "basis" is on an equal
footing, is a habit of thought from those dark ancient ages when
quantum amplitudes were thought to be states of partial
information.

You can slice up your *information* any way you like.  When you're
reorganizing your *beliefs*, the only question is whether the
answers *you want* are easy to *calculate*.

But if a model is meant to describe *reality*, then I would tend to
suspect that a locally causal model probably gets closer to
fundamentals, compared to a nonlocal model with
action-at-a-distance.  Even if the two give identical predictions.

This is admittedly a deep philosophical issue that gets us into
questions I can't answer, like "Why does the Tao of Physics like
math and CPT symmetry?" and "Why should a locally causal isomorph
of a structural essence, be privileged over nonlocal isomorphs when
it comes to calling it 'real'?", and "What the hell is the Tao?"

Good questions, I agree.

This talk about the Tao is messed-up reasoning.  And I *know* that
it's messed up.  And I'm not claiming that just because it's a
highly useful heuristic, that is an *excuse*for it being messed
up.

But I also think it's okay to have theories that are *in progress,*
that are not even *claimed* to be in a nice neat finished state,
that include messed-up elements *clearly labeled as messed-up*,
which are to be *resolved as soon as possible* rather than just
tolerated indefinitely.

That, I think, is how you make *incremental* progress on these
kinds of problems - by working with incomplete theories that have
wrong elements clearly labeled "WRONG!"  Academics, it seems to me,
have a bias toward publishing only theories that they claim to be
correct - or even worse, complete - or worse yet, coherent.  This,
of course, rules out incremental progress on really difficult
problems.

When using this methodology, you should, to avoid confusion, choose
labels that clearly indicate that the theory is wrong.  For
example, the "Tao of Physics".  If I gave that some kind of fancy
technical-sounding formal name like "metaphysical distribution",
people might think it was a name for a coherent theory, rather than
a name for my own confusion.

I accept the possibility that this whole blog post is merely
stupid.  After all, the question of whether the position basis or
the momentum basis is "more fundamental" should never make any
difference as to what we
[anticipate](/lw/i3/making_beliefs_pay_rent_in_anticipated_experiences/). 
If you ever find that your anticipations come out one way in the
position basis, and a different way in the momentum basis, you are
surely doing something wrong.

But Einstein (and others!) seem to have comprehended the Tao of
Physics to powerfully predictive effect.  The question "What kind
of laws does the Tao favor writing?" has paid more than a little
rent.

The position basis looks noticeably more... favored.

**Added:**  When I talk about "locality", I mean locality in the
abstract, computational sense: mathematical objects talking only to
their immediate neigbors.  In particular, quantum physics is local
in the configuration space.

This also happens to translate into physics that is local in what
humans think of "space": it is impossible to send signals faster
than light.  But this isn't immediately obvious.  It is an
additional structure of the neighborhoods in configuration space. 
A configuration only neighbors configurations where positions
didn't change faster than light.

A view that made both forms of locality explicit, in a
relativistically invariant way, would be much more fundamentalish
than the position basis.  Unfortunately I don't know what such a
view might be.
